                                                        
Based strictly on the uploaded FPSC Revised Syllabus (CE-2016 / updated 2015). 
Topics → Sections → Sub-sections → Sub-parts 
 
CSS SYLLABUS — SUBJECT-WISE TREE
----------------Page (0) Break----------------
51.  51. Zoology —  100 marks 
50.  50. Urdu Literature —  100 marks 
49.  49. Town Planning & Urban Management —  100 marks 
48.  48. Statistics —  100 marks 
47.  47. Sociology —  100 marks 
46.  46. Pure Mathematics —  100 marks 
45.  45. Punjabi —  100 marks 
44.  44. Public Administration —  100 marks 
43.  43. Psychology —  100 marks 
42.  42. Political Science —  200 marks 
41.  41. Physics —  200 marks 
40.  40. Philosophy —  100 marks 
39.  39. Persian —  100 marks 
38.  38. Pashto —  100 marks 
37.  37. Muslim Law & Jurisprudence —  100 marks 
36.  36. Mercantile Law —  100 marks 
35.  35. Law —  100 marks 
34.  34. Journalism & Mass Communication —  100 marks 
33.  33. Islamic History & Culture —  100 marks 
32.  32. International Relations —  200 marks 
31.  31. International Law —  100 marks 
30.  30. History Of Usa —  100 marks 
29.  29. History Of Pakistan & India —  100 marks 
28.  28. Governance & Public Policies —  100 marks 
27.  27. Geology —  100 marks 
26.  26. Geography —  100 marks 
25.  25. Gender Studies —  100 marks 
24.  24. European History —  100 marks 
23.  23. Environmental Science —  100 marks 
22.  22. English Literature —  100 marks 
21.  21. Economics —  200 marks 
20.  20. Criminology —  100 marks 
19.  19. Constitutional Law —  100 marks 
18.  18. Computer Science —  200 marks 
17.  17. Chemistry —  200 marks 
16.  16. Business Administration —  100 marks 
15.  15. British History —  100 marks 
14.  14. Botany —  100 marks 
13.  13. Balochi —  100 marks 
12.  12. Arabic —  100 marks 
11.  11. Applied Mathematics —  100 marks 
10.  10. Anthropology —  100 marks 
9.    09. Agriculture & Forestry —  100 marks 
8.    08. Accountancy & Auditing —  200 marks 
7.    07. Comparative Study Of Major Religions —  100 marks 
6.    06. Islamic Studies —  100 marks 
5.    05. Pakistan Affairs —  100 marks 
4.    04. Current Affairs —  100 marks 
3.    03. General Science & Ability —  100 marks 
2.    02. English (Precis & Composition) —  100 marks 
1.    01. English Essay —  100 marks 
Subject Index 
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
                                                        
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
                                                        
be examined. 
Candidate’s articulation, expression and technical treatment of the style of English Essay writing will 
Section 4 
Candidates are expected to reflect comprehensive and research based knowledge on a selected topic. 
Section 3 
A wide choice of topics will be given. 
Section 2 
Candidates will be required to write one or more Essay in English. 
Section 1 
English Essay —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (3) Break----------------
     etc 
     Grammar and Vocabulary 
     Translation 
     Sentence Structuring 
     Reading Comprehension 
handle Precis Writing 
     The examination in this subject will be based upon a paper carrying 100 marks to Test the candidate’s abilities to 
handle Precis Writing, Reading Comprehension, Sentence Structuring, Translation, Grammar and Vocabulary, etc 
The examination in this subject will be based upon a paper carrying 100 marks to Test the candidate’s abilities to 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
English (Precis & Composition) —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (4) Break----------------
                                                        
and figurative/idiomatic expressions shall be given, to be accurately translated into English. 
Translation (10 marks) Ten short Urdu sentences involving structural composition, significant terms 
by first explaining them in parenthesis and then using them in sentences. 
generally confused in communication, for bringing out the difference in meaning of any five of them 
Pairs of Words (10 marks) Ten pairs shall be given of seemingly similar words with different meanings, 
Section 4 
or opposite meaning, as may be clearly directed in the question. 
nor utterly unfamiliar) shall be given, to be grouped by the candidates in pairs of those having similar 
Grouping of Words (10 marks) A random list of twenty words of moderate standard (neither very easy 
exactly the same problem, and 2-3 sentences shall be based on correction of punctuation marks. 
correction only, without making unnecessary alterations. No two or more sentences should have 
terms of grammar or punctuation. The candidates shall be asked to rewrite them with really needed 
Sentence Correction (10 marks) The sentences shall be given each having a clear structural flaw in 
Section 3 
Punctuation, Phrasal Verbs, Synonyms and Antonyms etc. 
Grammar and Vocabulary (20 marks) Correct usage of Tense, Articles, Prepositions, Conjunctions, 
technical or discipline- specific shall be given, followed by five questions, each carrying 4 marks. 
Reading Comprehension (20 marks) A carefully selected passage that is rich in substance but not very 
Section 2 
the title. 
of the total 20 marks allocated to this question, 15 shall go to précising the text and 5 to suggesting 
enough flexibility for compression shall be given for précising and suggesting an appropriate title. Out 
Precis Writing (20 marks) A careful selected passage with an orientation of generic understanding and 
----------------Page (5) Break----------------
     Urban Fire. Disaster Risk Management 
     Wildfire 
     Drought 
     Middle Latitude Cyclone and Tornadoes) 
     Travelling Cyclone (Tropical Cyclone 
     Avalanche 
     Floods 
     Tsunami 
     Volcanic Eruption 
     - Earth Quake 
Cyclone and Tornadoes), Drought, Wildfire, Urban Fire. Disaster Risk Management 
- Earth Quake, Volcanic Eruption, Tsunami, Floods, Avalanche, Travelling Cyclone (Tropical Cyclone, Middle Latitude 
Natural Hazards and Disasters 
     Humidity) and Weather Variations 
     Precipitation 
     Circulation 
     Pressure 
     Weather Variables (Global Temperature 
     Rotation and Revolution 
     - Solar and Lunar Eclipses 
Precipitation, Humidity) and Weather Variations 
- Solar and Lunar Eclipses, Rotation and Revolution, Weather Variables (Global Temperature, Pressure, Circulation, 
Process of Nature 
     Astronomical System of Units 
     Earth 
     Sun 
     Solar System 
     Light Year 
     Galaxy 
     -Universe 
-Universe, Galaxy, Light Year, Solar System, Sun, Earth, Astronomical System of Units 
Constituents and Structure 
Physical Sciences 
Part-I (General Science) 60 Marks 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
General Science & Ability —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (6) Break----------------
     Dengue their Causes and Prevention 
     Hepatitis 
     Malaria 
     Diarrhea 
     - Polio 
- Polio, Diarrhea, Malaria, Hepatitis, Dengue their Causes and Prevention 
Common Diseases and Epidemics 
A Brief Account of Human Physiology 
- A brief survey of plant and animal kingdom to pinpoint similarities and diversities in nature 
Plant and Animal Kingdom 
     Carbohydrates and Enzymes 
     Lipids 
     - Proteins 
- Proteins, Lipids, Carbohydrates and Enzymes 
Biomolecules 
- Cell Structures and Functions (Subcellular Organelles such as Nucleus, Mitochondria and Ribosomes) 
The Basis of Life 
Biological Sciences 
Section 2 
     Pesticides 
     Fertilizers 
     Vaccines 
     Semiconductors. Antibiotics 
     Plastics 
     - Ceramics 
- Ceramics, Plastics, Semiconductors. Antibiotics, Vaccines, Fertilizers, Pesticides 
Modern Materials/Chemicals 
     Electromagnetic Radiations 
     Chemical Bonding 
     Atomic Structure 
Atomic Structure, Chemical Bonding, Electromagnetic Radiations 
     Wind Energy and Non-Renewable Energy conservation and its sustainable use 
     Solar Energy 
     - Sources of Energy (Renewable i.e. LED Energy 
and its sustainable use 
- Sources of Energy (Renewable i.e. LED Energy, Solar Energy, Wind Energy and Non-Renewable Energy conservation 
Energy Resources 
----------------Page (7) Break----------------
     Fiber 
     Minerals 
     Fats and oil 
     Protein 
     Carbohydrates 
     - Vitamins 
- Vitamins, Carbohydrates, Protein, Fats and oil, Minerals, Fiber 
Concept of Balance Diet 
Food Science 
Section 3 
Population Planning 
Role of Remote Sensing and GIS in Environmental Science 
- Solid waste management and disposal 
Land Pollution 
Drinking water quality and standards 
Wastes, Plant Nutrients, Thermal Pollution, Infectious Agents, Sediments, Radioactivity, Heavy Metals and Acids) . 
- Types, sources, causes and effects of major water pollutants (Synthetic Organic Chemicals, Oxygen Demanding 
Water Pollution 
Kyoto Protocol) 
Greenhouse Effect and Global Warming). International agreements on air pollution control (Montreal Protocol and 
Volatile Organic Compounds, Dioxins). Regional and Global air pollution issues (Acid-rain, Ozone Depletion, 
- Types, Sources, Causes and effects of major air pollutants (COx, Particulate Matter, NOx, SOx, Tropospheric Ozone, 
Atmospheric Pollution 
     Plate Tectonics) 
     Rock Types 
     Biosphere (Major Biomes) and Lithosphere (Minerals and Rocks 
     Major Water Compartments) 
     Hydrosphere (Water Cycle 
     - The Atmosphere (Layered Structure and Composition) 
Biosphere (Major Biomes) and Lithosphere (Minerals and Rocks, Rock Types, Plate Tectonics) 
- The Atmosphere (Layered Structure and Composition), Hydrosphere (Water Cycle, Major Water Compartments), 
Environment 
Environmental Science 
New Model Concept of Producing BIO Fuel Method 
----------------Page (8) Break----------------
     Surveillance and GPS and Fiber Optic etc. Part-II (General Ability) 40 Marks 
     Satellite 
     - Basics of Wireless Communication (Mobile 
Ability) 40 Marks 
- Basics of Wireless Communication (Mobile, Satellite, Surveillance and GPS and Fiber Optic etc. Part-II (General 
Telecommunications 
     Social Media Websites. Information Systems. Fundamentals of artificial intelligence  
     Application and business Software 
     Networking & Internet Standards 
     I/O Processing and data storage 
Websites. Information Systems. Fundamentals of artificial intelligence 
I/O Processing and data storage, Networking & Internet Standards, Application and business Software, Social Media 
Computer (Hardware & Software Fundamentals) 
Information Technology 
     Food Preservation 
     Adulteration 
     - Causes of Food Deterioration 
- Causes of Food Deterioration, Adulteration, Food Preservation 
Food Deterioration and its Control 
     Preservatives and Antioxidants 
     Food Additives 
     Quality of Packed and Frozen Food 
     Flavor 
     Texture 
     Appearance 
     - Bioavailability of Nutrients 
Preservatives and Antioxidants 
- Bioavailability of Nutrients, Appearance, Texture, Flavor, Quality of Packed and Frozen Food, Food Additives, 
Quality of Food 
----------------Page (9) Break----------------
                                                        
     numerical and social ability 
     mechanical 
     Mental Abilities Scales that measures specific constructs such as verbal 
Mental Abilities Scales that measures specific constructs such as verbal, mechanical, numerical and social ability 
Mental Abilities 
Section 5 
ability to apply logical thinking to gathering and analyzing information 
and concepts and making decisions that are sensible based on available information, including demonstration of the 
Analytical Reasoning/Ability includes visualizing, articulating and solving both complex and uncomplicated problems 
procedures and given statements to arrive at a conclusion 
Logical Reasoning includes the process of using a rational, systematic series of steps based on sound mathematical 
Logical Reasoning and Analytical Reasoning/Ability 
Random Sampling 
Equations, Symbols, Rounding of Numbers 
Basic Arithmetic, Algebra and Geometry (Average, Ratios, Rates, Percentage, Angles, Triangles, Sets, Remainders, 
Concepts and ability to reasons quantitatively and solve problems in a quantitative setting 
Basic Mathematical Skills 
Quantitative Ability/Reasoning 
Section 4 
----------------Page (10) Break----------------
     GCC) 
     WTO 
     OIC 
     ECO 
     SAARC 
     Pakistan’s relations with Regional and International Organizations (UN 
Pakistan’s relations with Regional and International Organizations (UN, SAARC, ECO, OIC, WTO, GCC) 
Pakistan’s relations with the United States 
     Turkey) 
     Indonesia 
     Saudi Arabia 
     Pakistan’s relations with the Muslim World (Iran 
Pakistan’s relations with the Muslim World (Iran, Saudi Arabia, Indonesia, Turkey) 
     Russia) 
     Afghanistan 
     China 
     Pakistan’s relations with its Neighbors (India 
Pakistan’s relations with its Neighbors (India, China, Afghanistan, Russia) 
Pakistan's External Affairs (40 marks) 
Section 3 
Social 
Economic 
Political 
Pakistan's Domestic Affairs (20 marks) 
Section 2 
deemed necessary to interpret current affairs 
Candidates will be expected to display such general knowledge of history, politics and International Affairs, as 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Current Affairs —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (11) Break----------------
                                                        
Palestine Issue 
Kashmir Issue 
Middle East Crisis 
Globalization 
     Current Status 
     Millennium Development Goals 
Millennium Development Goals, Current Status 
     Indian and Pacific Oceans 
     Cooperation and Competition in Arabian Sea 
Cooperation and Competition in Arabian Sea, Indian and Pacific Oceans 
International Trade (Doha Development Round and Bali Package) 
Nuclear Politics in South Asia 
Nuclear Proliferation and Nuclear Security 
Global Energy Politics 
Terrorism and Counter Terrorism 
     world population policies 
     world population trends 
world population trends, world population policies 
Population 
     Copenhagen Accord 
     Kyoto Protocol 
     Global Warming 
Global Warming, Kyoto Protocol, Copenhagen Accord 
Environment 
Human Rights 
International Political Economy 
International Security 
Global Issues (40 marks) 
Section 4 
----------------Page (12) Break----------------
     trends and problems 
     Industry and education with reference to characteristics 
     Agriculture 
     Natural resources 
     Society 
     Geography 
and problems 
Geography, Society, Natural resources, Agriculture, Industry and education with reference to characteristics, trends 
Land and people of Pakistan 
     Quaid- i Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah 
     statements of Allama Iqbal 
     Islamia College Peshawar. Ideology of Pakistan in the light of Speeches 
     and other educational institutions-------Sindh Madrassah 
     Nadwah 
     Deoband 
     Aligarh 
     Sayyid Ahmad Shaheed  
     Shah Waliullah 
     efforts for Renaissance. Movements for reforms-- Shaikh Ahmad Sarhindi  
     its downfall 
     Muslim rule in the Sub-Continent 
of Pakistan in the light of Speeches and statements of Allama Iqbal and Quaid- i Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah 
Deoband, Nadwah, and other educational institutions-------Sindh Madrassah and Islamia College Peshawar. Ideology 
Renaissance. Movements for reforms-- Shaikh Ahmad Sarhindi, Shah Waliullah, Sayyid Ahmad Shaheed, Aligarh, 
definition and elucidation, historical aspects: Muslim rule in the Sub-Continent, its downfall and efforts for 
Ideology of Pakistan 
Section 1 
Pakistan Affairs —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (13) Break----------------
Pakistan’s Relations with Neighbors excluding India 
Pakistan’s Energy Problems and their Effects 
Challenges to Sovereignty 
Section 4 
Pakistan’s National Interest 
Hydro Politics ; Water Issues in Domestic and Regional Context 
Ethnic Issues and National Integration 
Evolution of Democratic System in Pakistan 
Foreign Policy of Pakistan Post 9/11 
Pakistan and US War on Terror 
Section 3 
Political Evolution Since 1971 
Challenges to National Security of Pakistan 
Changing Security Dynamics for Pakistan 
The Palestine Issue 
Pakistan’s Role in the Region 
Role of Non-State Actors 
Non-Traditional Security Threats in Pakistan 
Economic Challenges in Pakistan 
Section 2 
Civil-Military Relations in Pakistan 
Regional Cooperation Organizations (SAARC,ECO,SCO) and the Role of Pakistan 
Nuclear Program of Pakistan, its Safety and Security; International Concerns 
Pakistan and Changing Regional Apparatus 
----------------Page (14) Break----------------
                                                        
Health and Sanitation. 
The Prevailing Social Problems of Pakistan and the Strategies to Deal with Them, Poverty, Education, 
Legislations, Legal Cases and the Role of Higher Courts. 
The Recent Constitutional and Legal Debates, the Latest Constitutional Amendments and Important 
Budgets, and the Problems and Performance of Major Sectors of Economy. 
Economic Conditions of Pakistan, the Most Recent Economic Survey, the Previous and Current 
Role of External Elements 
Proxy Wars 
Section 5 
The war in Afghanistan since 1979 and its impact on, and challenges to Pakistan in the Post 2014 era. 
The Kashmir Issue 
Pakistan and India Relations Since 1947 
----------------Page (15) Break----------------
     Moral and Social Impact 
     Spiritual 
Spiritual, Moral and Social Impact 
Islamic Worships 
Islamic Beliefs & its Impact on Individual & Society and the Fundamental of Islam 
Distinctive Aspects of Islam 
Difference between Din and Religion 
Importance of Din in Human Life 
Concept of Islam 
Introduction to Islam. 
Section 1 
Islamic Studies —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (16) Break----------------
     Rule of Law) 
     Tolerance 
     Moral Values 
     Social Justice 
     Equality 
     Dignity of Man 
     Self-purification 
     Characteristicts of Islamic Civilization (Tawhid 
Values, Tolerance, Rule of Law) 
Characteristicts of Islamic Civilization (Tawhid, Self-purification, Dignity of Man, Equality, Social Justice, Moral 
Role of Civilization in Development of Human Personality and Community 
Meanings and the Vital Elements 
Islamic Civilization and Culture 
Dignity of Men and Women 
Human Rights and Status of Woman in Islam 
Human Rights & Status of Woman in Islam. 
Section 2 
Peace Maker 
Military Strategist 
Educator 
Diplomat 
Individual 
Study of Sirah of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) as Role Model for 
----------------Page (17) Break----------------
                                                        
Procedure of Ijma and Ijtihad 
     Administrative System 
     Judicial System 
     Economic System 
     Political System 
     Social System 
     Salient Features of Islamic System 
System, 
Salient Features of Islamic System, Social System, Political System, Economic System, Judicial System, Administrative 
Islamic Code of Life. 
Section 4 
System of Accountability(hisbah) in Islam 
Responsibilities of Civil Servants 
Particular letters of Hazrat Umar (R.A) and Hazrat Ali (R.A) to different Authority 
Governance under Pious Khilafat 
     Sources of Islamic Law) 
     Legislation 
     Governance Structure in Islam (Shura 
Governance Structure in Islam (Shura, Legislation, Sources of Islamic Law) 
     Sunnah and Fiqh 
     Concept of Governance and its Applications in the light of Qur’an 
Concept of Governance and its Applications in the light of Qur’an, Sunnah and Fiqh 
Quranic Guidance on Good Governance 
Concept of Public Administration in Islam 
Public Administration and Governance in Islam 
Rise of Extremism 
Muslim World and the Contemporary Challenges 
The Role of Islam in the Modern World 
Impact of Islamic Civilization on the West and Vice Versa 
Islam and the World. 
Section 3 
----------------Page (18) Break----------------
     Moksha (Liberation) 
     Transmigration of Souls 
     Karma 
     Vedanta 
     Dharma 
Dharma, Vedanta, Karma, Transmigration of Souls, Moksha (Liberation) 
Hindu Doctrines 
     Mahabharata 
     Great epics: Ramayana 
     Puranas 
     Sutras 
     Smirti: Manu Smirti 
     Upanishads 
     Vedas 
Sruti: Vedas, Upanishads, Smirti: Manu Smirti, Sutras, Puranas, Great epics: Ramayana, Mahabharata 
Scriptures 
     Brahmanism 
     Vedic Dharma 
     Aryan invasion theory 
     Historical Background Indus valley civilization 
Historical Background Indus valley civilization, Aryan invasion theory, Vedic Dharma, Brahmanism 
Hinduism 
Section 2 
An overview of religious landscape of the World 
Theological and academic study of religion 
Emergence of the study of religion as a discipline 
Definition(s) of religion 
Introduction 
(Alternative Paper in Lieu of the Compulsory Islamic Studies) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Marks 
Comparative Study Of Major Religions —  100 
----------------Page (19) Break----------------
     The four noble truths 
     Sangha 
     Dhamma 
     Buddha 
Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha, The four noble truths, Eight fold Path 
Teachings and Doctrines Three Jewels of Buddhism 
     Abhidhamma Pitaka 
     Vinaya Pitaka 
     Sutta Pitaka 
Tripitaka: Sutta Pitaka, Vinaya Pitaka, Abhidhamma Pitaka 
Scriptures 
     Rivalry between Brahmanism and &Buddhism 
     Formation and spread of Buddhism 
     Historical Background Life of Gautama Buddha 
and &Buddhism 
Historical Background Life of Gautama Buddha, Formation and spread of Buddhism, Rivalry between Brahmanism 
Buddhism 
movements 
Hinduism in the Modern World 19th century reform and revival movements, Contemporary Hindu Tendencies and 
     Ashramas (Stages of life) 
     Caste System 
Caste System, Ashramas (Stages of life) 
Hindu society 
     Saktism (Goddess worship) 
     Saivism (Supreme God & Phallic worship) 
     Vaishavism (Manifestation avatars) 
Vaishavism (Manifestation avatars), Saivism (Supreme God & Phallic worship), Saktism (Goddess worship) 
Major Hindu Sects 
     other gods and divinities 
     Trimurti 
     Shiva 
     Vishnu 
     Brahma 
Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, Trimurti, other gods and divinities 
Hindu gods 
     Bhakti marga (Devotion) 
     Jnana marga (Wisdom) 
     Karma marga (Works/Rituals) 
Karma marga (Works/Rituals), Jnana marga (Wisdom), Bhakti marga (Devotion) 
Ways to Liberation 
----------------Page (20) Break----------------
     Jewish sects and movements Orthodox Judaism 
Hasidism 
Jewish sects and movements Orthodox Judaism, Conservative Judaism, Reform Judaism, Zionism, Kabbalah, 
     Sabbath 
     fasting 
     Daily prayer 
Daily prayer, fasting, Sabbath 
Jewish Worship 
     Sukkot (Tabernacles) Purim 
     Pesach (Passover) 
     Yom Kippur (The Day of Atonement) 
Yom Kippur (The Day of Atonement), Pesach (Passover), Sukkot (Tabernacles) Purim 
Jewish holidays and festivals 
Ten Commandments, The thirteen principles of faith propounded by Moses Maimonides (1138-1204) 
Articles of faith and basic teachings 
     Mishnah and Talmud 
     and the Writings) 
     the Prophets 
     Tanakh (The Torah 
Tanakh (The Torah, the Prophets, and the Writings), Mishnah and Talmud 
Jewish Scriptures 
     Destruction of Jerusalem and dispersion of Jews in the world 
     From Moses to establishment of Jewish rule 
     peace be upon them all 
     From Abraham to Moses 
Jerusalem and dispersion of Jews in the world, 
From Abraham to Moses, peace be upon them all, From Moses to establishment of Jewish rule, Destruction of 
A brief history of Jews and Judaism 
Judaism 
Section 3 
Buddhism in the Modern world 
     other schools and sects 
     Mahayana 
     Theravadas (Hinayana) 
Theravadas (Hinayana), Mahayana, other schools and sects 
Buddhist Sects 
     Eight fold Path 
----------------Page (21) Break----------------
     fasting 
     prayer 
     Lord’s Supper 
     Communion 
     Eucharist 
     Christian worship and Sacraments Baptism 
Christian worship and Sacraments Baptism, Eucharist, Communion, Lord’s Supper, prayer, fasting, psalms, music, 
     Pentecost 
     Easter 
     Christmas 
     Advent 
Advent, Christmas, Easter, Pentecost 
Christian Festivals and Holidays 
     Unitarians 
     Methodists 
     Baptists 
     Anglicans 
     Presbyterians 
     Reformed 
     Lutherans 
Anglicans, Baptists, Methodists, Unitarians 
Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Protestantism Sub-denominations: Lutherans, Reformed and Presbyterians, 
Christian Sects 
     Trinity 
     Atonement 
     Crucifixion and Resurrection of Jesus Christ 
     Incarnation of God 
     Original Sin 
Original Sin, Incarnation of God, Crucifixion and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, Atonement, Trinity 
Basic Doctrines 
The Holy Bible (Old Testament and New Testament) 
Scriptures 
Reform movement 
(Through the Letters of Paul), Formation and spread of the Christian Church, Christianization of the Roman Empire, 
Jewish background of Christianity, Life and of Jesus Christ (Through the Four Gospels), Life and the role of Paul 
Historical background 
Christianity 
     Hasidism 
     Kabbalah 
     Zionism 
     Reform Judaism 
     Conservative Judaism 
----------------Page (22) Break----------------
     tolerance towards other religions 
     Jihad 
     social justice 
     moderation 
     contentment 
     patience 
     spiritual purity and bodily hygiene 
     simplicity 
     Other Teachings of Islam Equality of mankind 
moderation, social justice, Jihad, tolerance towards other religions, 
Other Teachings of Islam Equality of mankind, simplicity, spiritual purity and bodily hygiene, patience, contentment, 
Makkah who can afford travelling to it) 
(five daily prayers), zakah (compulsory charity), sawm (fasting in the month of Ramadan) and Hajj (pilgrimage to 
Utterance of Shahadatayn (To proclaim the Oneness of Allah and that Prophet Muhammad is his messenger, salah 
Five Pillars of Islam 
predestination and human responsibility before God, infallibility of the Quran 
Akhirah (Belief in Hereafter and the final reckoning by Allah the Almighty), Belief in angels, previous scriptures, 
Tawhid (Oneness of God), Risalah (Belief in Prophets and finality of the prophet-hood with the Prophet Muhammad), 
Basic Doctrines and Creed 
     Hadith 
     The Holy Quran 
Sacred Scriptures: The Holy Quran, Hadith 
     The era of rightly guided caliphs of Islam 
     peace be upon him 
     Sirah (Life) of the Holy Prophet Muhammad 
     universality of religion and diversity of shari‘ahs 
     Introduction and Historical Background Islamic concept of religion 
Sirah (Life) of the Holy Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, The era of rightly guided caliphs of Islam 
Introduction and Historical Background Islamic concept of religion, universality of religion and diversity of shari‘ahs, 
Islam 
Section 4 
     Dialogue and relationship with other religions 
     Missionary movement 
     modern theological trends 
     Christianity in the Modern Times Encounter with modernity 
Dialogue and relationship with other religions 
Christianity in the Modern Times Encounter with modernity, modern theological trends, Missionary movement, 
     music 
     psalms 
----------------Page (23) Break----------------
                                                        
     extremist groups 
     Iranian revolution 
     Fethullah Gulen movement in Turkey 
     Salafi movement 
     Tablighi Jama‘at 
     Jama‘at-i-Islami 
     Ikwan al Muslimun (Muslim Brotherhood) 
movement in Turkey, Iranian revolution, extremist groups 
Ikwan al Muslimun (Muslim Brotherhood), Jama‘at-i-Islami, Tablighi Jama‘at, Salafi movement, Fethullah Gulen 
Contemporary Islamic movements and tendencies 
     Mu‘tazilah (rationalists) 
     Khawarij (literalists) 
     Shi‘ahs (Special devotion for Hazrat Ali and Family of the Prophet) 
     Sects and Schools Sunnis (mainstream Muslims) 
Khawarij (literalists), Mu‘tazilah (rationalists) 
Sects and Schools Sunnis (mainstream Muslims), Shi‘ahs (Special devotion for Hazrat Ali and Family of the Prophet), 
----------------Page (24) Break----------------
Accountancy & Auditing —  200 Marks 
----------------Page (25) Break----------------
Fair Value 
Depreciation 
Depreciable Amount 
Fundamental Concepts and Principles concerning Non-current Assets: Cost 
Accounting for Non-current Tangible Assets 
Board and Practices being followed in the country 
Standardized Financial Reporting Framework provided by International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) 
Accounting Principles and Financial Statements - of Associations Not-for-profit, and – of Public Sector Entities as per 
Accounting for Associations Not-for-profit, and for Public Sector 
including Banking Companies (Excluding Advanced Topics like Amalgamation, Capital Reduction, Consolidation etc.) 
Accounting Principles and Financial Statements of Sole-proprietorships, Partnerships and Joint Stock Companies 
Accounting for common Legal Forms of a Business 
Section 2 
Government Agencies etc.) and Internal (Board of Directors, Partners, Managers, Employees etc.) Stakeholders 
Financial Statements including External (Investors/Shareholders, Creditors, Suppliers, Lenders/Financiers, 
Attributes of Accounting Information, Information/Reporting Requirements of various Users/Stakeholders of 
Attributes, and Significance of Accounting Information 
Reversing Entries 
and by Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan through Companies Ordinance 1984, and Closing and 
Financial Reporting Framework as specified by International Accounting Standard Board (IASB) through IFRSs/IASs, 
Position (Balance Sheet), Statement of Cash Flows and Statement of Changes in Equity in accordance with the 
Adjusted Trial Balance, Work Sheet, Financial Statements including Income Statement, Statement of Financial 
Transactions and/or Events, General Journal, General Ledger, Trial Balance (Unadjusted),Adjusting Entries and 
Accounting Cycle/Process and Financial Statements 
and Substance over Form 
and Fair View, Neutrality, Materiality, Prudence, Completeness, Understandability and Usefulness, Going Concern, 
Nature and Scope of Accounting, Accrual/Matching Concept, Consistency of Presentation and Comparability, True 
Fundamental Accounting Principles, Concepts, Assumptions and Conventions 
Paper-I (MARKS-100) (A) Financial Accounting (50 Marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
----------------Page (26) Break----------------
     and Job-order Costing 
     Nature of a Specific Job 
Nature of a Specific Job, and Job-order Costing 
Costing for Specific Jobs, and Process Costing 
Repeated Apportionment/Distribution and Algebraic Method 
Reapportionment (Primary and Secondary Distributions), Methods for Secondary Distribution including both 
Factory Overhead Costs and FOH Rate, Departmentalization of FOH Costs, their Allocation, Apportionment and 
Commonly used Group Incentive Schemes 
Calculation/Measurement and Accounting for Payroll for all forms of Labour, Time Rate and Piece Rate Systems 
Recognition and Valuation Principles for Material Inventory, and Methods to control Material Inventory 
Accounting for Material, Labour and Factory Overheads (FOH) 
     and Management Accounting 
     Cost 
     Underlying Differences among Financial 
Underlying Differences among Financial, Cost, and Management Accounting 
     Elements and Classification 
     Cost Concepts 
Cost Concepts, Elements and Classification 
Nature and Scope of Cost and Managerial Accounting 
Fundamental Cost Accounting Principles and Concepts 
Section 3 
Technical and Industry Analysis. (B) Cost and Managerial Accounting (50 Marks) 
Liquidity Ratios, Activity Ratios, Debt Ratios, Profitability Ratios and Market Ratios 
Financial Statements’ Analysis including both Horizontal (Measuring Change) and Vertical (Ratio) Analysis including 
Fundamental and Technical Analysis of various Forms of Organizations 
Number of Units Produced and basic know-how of other Methods/Techniques being commonly used by the Industry 
Reducing Balance Method 
Board):Straight-line Method 
and Useful Life. Depreciation Methods and their Application (as specified by International Accounting Standards 
Residual Value 
     Plant and Equipment 
     Property 
Property, Plant and Equipment 
----------------Page (27) Break----------------
     Auditor’s Opinion and Report 
Auditor’s Opinion and Report, and their classification (Types) 
     and Liabilities  
     Responsibilities & Duties  
     Auditor’s professional and legal Rights 
Auditor’s professional and legal Rights, Responsibilities & Duties, and Liabilities 
Role and Responsibilities of  an Auditor 
Banking, Insurance, Investment Entities etc., Audit Performance and Audit Completion  
and Techniques commonly applicable to various Types of Undertakings including Merchandizing, Manufacturing, 
Computer Information Systems (EDP Systems) and Computer -assisted Audit Techniques, General Auditing Principles 
Management, Internal Audit and Corporate Governance, Classification of Audit, Qualities of an Auditor, Auditing in 
Planning, Scope of an Audit, Objectives of  an Audit, Inherent Limitations of an Audit, Risk Assessment and 
Internal Control System and Internal Audit, Internal VS External Audit, Responsibility for Financial Statements, Audit 
Audit Considerations, Dimensions and Conduct  
Control and Substantive Procedures  
(CAAT), Inspection, Fraud, Going Concern, Audit Materiality, Misstatement, Governance and Pre  mise, Tests of 
Audit Program, Audit Risks, Computer Information Systems (EDP Systems) and Computer -assisted Audit Techniques 
Audit and Auditing, True and Fair View, Audit Assertions, Rea sonable Assurance, Documentation and Audit Evidence, 
Fundamental Auditing Principles and Concepts  
Section 4 
(MARKS-100) (A) Auditing (40 Marks)  
Major Classification of Variances including Material, Labour and FOH Variances, and their Computation. Paper-II 
     Variances 
     Use of Standards 
     Meaning 
Analysis) Variance Analysis: Meaning and Use of Standards and Variances 
Application and Use of Contribution Margin and other Concepts for Planning and Decision-making (under Break-even 
Concept of Relevant Cost 
     Absorption Costing Techniques 
     Difference between Marginal 
Master Budget etc. Break-even Analysis: Difference between Marginal and Absorption Costing Techniques 
Major Forms of a Budget including Production and Sales Budget, Cash Budget, Flexible Budgets, Zero-based Budget, 
     Nature of a Budget 
     Meaning 
Budgeting and its Use: Meaning and Nature of a Budget 
Management Accounting for Planning, Decision-making and Control 
Process Flow and Process Costing by the use of Cost of Production Report (CPR) 
----------------Page (28) Break----------------
     Nature and Scope of Finance 
     Meaning 
Meaning, Nature and Scope of Finance, and Financial Management 
Finance 
Role of Information Technology in Business 
Business Cycle and its Implications 
Business Combinations and their Scope 
     Formation and Management 
     their Features 
     Joint Stock Company 
     Partnership 
     Common Legal Forms of a Business Entity – Sole- proprietorship 
Formation and Management 
Common Legal Forms of a Business Entity – Sole- proprietorship, Partnership, Joint Stock Company, their Features, 
     Contemporary Challenges posed to a Business 
     Nature and Scope of a Business Entity 
Nature and Scope of a Business Entity, Contemporary Challenges posed to a Business 
Business Studies 
Studies, and Finance (30 Marks) 
Period [Section 2(43)], Time of Supply [Section 2(44)], and Determination of Tax Liability [Section 7]. (C) Business 
2(27)& 2(28)], Taxable Activity [Section 2(35)], Taxable Supply [Section 2(41)], Tax Fraction [Section 2(36)], Tax 
Registered person [Section 2(25)], Supply [Section 2(33)], Tax [Section 2(34)], Retail Price and Retailer [Section 
from Sales Tax –Scope of Tax [Section 3], Exempt supply [Section 2(11)], Goods [Section 2(12)], Input Tax [2(14)], 
holding Tax [Sections 147, 149, 153, 155]and related Income Tax Rules 2002. Selected Definitions and Provisions 
Companies [Sections 86, 92, 94], Due Date for Payment of Tax [Section 137], Deduction of Tax at Source/With-
from other sources[Section 39, 40, 101(6), 111],Tax Credits [Sections 61 to 65], Taxation of Individuals, AOPs and 
from Property [Sections 15 & 16], Income from Business[Sections 18 to 20], Capital Gains[Sections 37 to38], Income 
Payable on Taxable Income [First Schedule to the Ordinance], Salary Income and Taxation [Sections 12 to 14], Income 
Selected Provisions from Income Tax - Income for Tax Purposes [Section 4, 9 & 10], Heads of Income [Section 11], Tax 
Income Tax and Sales Tax Principles, and their Application 
Section 5 
Fundamental Definitions/Terminologies defined under Section 2 of the Income Tax Ordinance 2001 
Tax Structure in Pakistan 
Tax Structure, and Fundamental Concepts vis-à-vis Income Tax in Pakistan 
- as specified under the Companies Ordinance 1984, and in the handbook of IFAC. (B) Business Taxation (30 Marks) 
     and their classification (Types) 
----------------Page (29) Break----------------
                                                        
     Capital Budgeting Techniques 
     Cost of Capital 
     Time Value of Money 
Techniques 
Financial Management Techniques for Decision- making: Time Value of Money, Cost of Capital and Capital Budgeting 
Features and Classification of Financial Markets 
Nature and Scope of Financial Markets and Institutions 
     and Long-term Financing 
     Medium- 
     Common Modes (Types) of Business Finance – Short- 
Common Modes (Types) of Business Finance – Short-, Medium-, and Long-term Financing 
     and Financial Management 
----------------Page (30) Break----------------
     water logging and salinity 
     soil erosion and conservation 
     soil fertility 
     structure and texture 
     soil profile 
     biological nitrogen fixation 
     Farming Systems 
conservation, water logging and salinity 
Farming Systems, biological nitrogen fixation, soil profile, structure and texture, soil fertility, soil erosion and 
Elements of Climate and their Relationship with Crop Growth 
     options 
     policies: issues 
     rural development. Institutions 
     resource management 
     cottage industry 
     fisheries 
     livestock management 
     strategies for improvement of crop management 
     issues 
Institutions and policies: issues and options 
management, livestock management, fisheries, cottage industry, resource management and rural development. 
Present scenario and future prospects. Analytical overview: issues and strategies for improvement of crop 
Challenges in Pakistan’s Agriculture 
     Energy) 
     Solar 
     Environmental 
     biological 
     Water 
     Components of natural resources as bases for agriculture production (Land 
Energy) 
Components of natural resources as bases for agriculture production (Land, Water, biological, Environmental, Solar, 
Concept of Integrated Agriculture 
Part-I: Agriculture (50 marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Agriculture & Forestry —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (31) Break----------------
     role of agriculture in national economy. Part-II Forestry = (50 Marks) 
     land tenure and land reforms 
     Agriculture mechanization 
(50 Marks) 
Agriculture mechanization, land tenure and land reforms, role of agriculture in national economy. Part-II Forestry = 
Rainfed and Irrigated Agriculture 
     integrated pest management 
     pests and diseases of agriculture crops and their control 
     landscaping 
     Floriculture 
Floriculture, landscaping, pests and diseases of agriculture crops and their control, integrated pest management 
Horticulture 
     Seed production technology 
     GMO crops 
GMO crops, Seed production technology 
Genetic Improvement for Crop Production 
Section 2 
----------------Page (32) Break----------------
                                                        
National forest laws and policies at national level, biodiversity & environment 
Section 5 
Watershed Management and role of forests in prevailing climate change dilemma 
Socio-economic and ecological impact of man made forests 
Forestry, agroforestry, social forestry and forest biometrics 
Forest based wildlife resources of Pakistan and their management, eco-tourism 
Section 4 
Role of wildlife as value addition to forestry 
National and international forest wealth statistics 
Range management and utilization 
Forest management and utilization, wood based industries in Pakistan, silviculture 
Section 3 
Forest, rangelands and wildlife importance and significance 
----------------Page (33) Break----------------
     reciprocity 
     substantivism versus formalism 
     evolution 
     (Definitions 
and primitive economic systems) 
(Definitions, evolution, substantivism versus formalism, reciprocity, production, consumption, distribution, barter 
Economic Organization 
     kinship terminology etc) 
     functions 
     types 
     Kinship and Social Organization (Definitions 
Kinship and Social Organization (Definitions, types, functions, kinship terminology etc) 
     family organization) 
     functions 
     structures 
     types 
     Institution of Family and Marriage (Definitions 
Institution of Family and Marriage (Definitions, types, structures, functions, family organization) 
d) Socio-Cultural Anthropology 
c) Linguistic Anthropology 
     b) Archaeology 
b) Archaeology, 
     a) Biological Anthropology 
a) Biological Anthropology, 
Sub fields of anthropology: 
Relationship of anthropology with other social sciences 
     its characteristics and functions 
     Definition of culture 
Definition of culture, its characteristics and functions 
Social Anthropology 
     its historical development and recent trends 
     Definition of anthropology 
Definition of anthropology, its historical development and recent trends 
Anthropology 
Section 1 
Anthropology —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (34) Break----------------
     d) Socio-Cultural Anthropology 
     c) Linguistic Anthropology 
     b) Archaeology, 
     a) Biological Anthropology, 
     ethnic violence and terrorism etc 
     population problems 
     political instability 
     social inequality 
     Poverty 
Poverty, social inequality, political instability, population problems, ethnic violence and terrorism etc 
Contemporary Human Problems 
     Jainism etc) 
     Buddhism 
     comparison of devine religions and other world religions such as Hinduism  
     functions of religion 
     evolution of primitive religions 
     (Definitions 
religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism etc) 
(Definitions, evolution of primitive religions, functions of religion, comparison of devine religions and other world 
Religion 
identity, ethnicity and ethnic relations, nationalism, modernism, post-modernism etc 
institutionalization of leadership and the emergence of state, system theories), origin of civilization, the politics of 
the origin of state societies (internal conflict theories, external conflict theories, population and irrigation theories, 
(Definitions, evolution of political system, characteristics of (band, tribal, chiefdom and state societies), theories of 
Political Organization 
     barter and primitive economic systems) 
     distribution 
     consumption 
     production 
----------------Page (35) Break----------------
     Historical Particularism 
     Structuralism 
     Class struggle 
     Structural-functionalism 
     (Functionalism 
and personality) 
(Functionalism, Structural-functionalism, Class struggle, Structuralism, Historical Particularism, Feminism, Culture 
Modern Theories 
     Diffusions) 
     Neo-Evolutionism 
     Evolutionism 
     (Degenerations 
(Degenerations, Evolutionism, Neo-Evolutionism, Diffusions) 
Classical Theories 
Talal Asad, Akbar S. Ahamd, Ibn Khaldun, Shah Walliullah) 
Ruth Benedict, Alfred L. Krobber, Alfred Reginald Radcliffe-Brown, Bronislaw Kasper Malinowski, Clifford Geertz, 
(Edward Burnett Taylor, Lewis Henry Morgan, James Frazer, Karl Marx, Edmund Leach, Franz Boas, Margaret Mead, 
Contributors 
Anthropological Theories 
social stratification etc. 
nationality, ethnic conflict, degree of social variation, rank societies, caste and class societies and 
Ethnicity and Race Theories related to ethnicity and race, ethnicity and racism, nations and 
Section 3 
change, dynamics of change in Pakistan (Trends and prospects) 
innovations, socio-religious barriers in accepting the innovations and new ideas, media and cultural 
dynamics for change, external dynamics for change, population incease and change, diffusion of 
of cultural change, barriers to cultural change including (culture, psychological and political), internal 
Socio-Cultural Change Definitions, difference between social and cultural change, various dimension 
etc.), Karl Marx and conflict theory, problems created by the mechanization and automation. 
cultural, economic, political, religious, physical, environmental, ecological, demographical, lingual 
(agriculture to capitalists), poverty (theories and remedies), management of city life (psychological, 
industrialists, institutionalization, education system, and change in the mode of production 
settlements, refugees, yankees, betties, gypsies, wars and conflict, conversion of power from feudal to 
sanitation problems, urbanization and development, establishment of slums and squatter 
Urban Anthropology Rural-urban migration, expansion of cities, major environmental issues, 
Section 2 
----------------Page (36) Break----------------
                                                        
analysis, and reporting 
data collection, tools of data collection (questionnaire, interview, participant observation), data classification, data 
Purpose of research, research question, variables, hypothesis, research objective(s), research design, sampling, field 
Qualitative and Quantitative research 
     types and aims of anthropological research 
     definition 
     Meaning 
Meaning, definition, types and aims of anthropological research 
Anthropological Research Methods 
Section 4 
     Poetics and Politics of Ethnography) 
     Romanticism 
     (Post Modernism 
(Post Modernism, Romanticism, Poetics and Politics of Ethnography) 
Current Trends in Anthropological Thoughts 
     Culture and personality) 
     Feminism 
----------------Page (37) Break----------------
     Bernoulli and Riccati equations 
     nonlinear equations reducible to linear equations 
nonlinear equations reducible to linear equations, Bernoulli and Riccati equations 
orthogonal trajectories 
first order linear equations 
     exact equations 
     separable equations 
separable equations, exact equations 
Equations of first order 
Ordinary differential equations (20%) 
Kepler laws 
planetary orbits 
motion under central forces 
     radial and transverse components of velocity and acceleration 
     normal 
     Tangential 
Tangential, normal, radial and transverse components of velocity and acceleration 
conservative forces and principles of energy 
simple harmonic motion 
Motion in a straight line with constant and variable acceleration 
Dynamics (10%) 
Section 2 
forces in three dimensions. 
system of coplanar forces; centre of mass of a system of particles and rigid bodies; equilibrium of 
Statics (10%) Composition and resolution of forces; parallel forces and couples; equilibrium of a 
curl of a vector; line, surface and volume integrals; Green’s, Stokes’ and Gauss theorems. 
Vector Calculus (10%) Vector algebra; scalar and vector products of vectors; gradient divergence and 
Section 1 
Applied Mathematics —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (38) Break----------------
     secant and Newton-Raphson methods 
     Solution of nonlinear equations by bisection 
Solution of nonlinear equations by bisection, secant and Newton-Raphson methods 
Numerical Methods (30%) 
problems associated with Laplace equation, wave equation and the heat equation in Cartesian coordinates 
solution by the method of separation of variables 
boundary value problems 
classification of partial differential equations of second order 
Partial differential equations of first order 
convergence of the Fourier series 
summation of infinite series 
Bessel inequality 
sine and cosine series 
Trigonometric Fourier series 
Fourier series and partial differential equations (20%) 
Section 3 
properties of the Bessel functions and Legendre polynomials 
Bessel and Legendre equations 
solution in series 
Ordinary and singular points of a differential equation 
variation of parameters 
Cauchy-Euler equations 
homogeneous and inhomogeneous equations 
Equations with constant coefficients 
----------------Page (39) Break----------------
                                                        
Runge- Kutta methods 
Euler and modified Euler methods 
Numerical solution of an ordinary differential equation 
     Gaussian integration formulas 
     Simpson’s rules 
     trapezoidal rule 
trapezoidal rule, Simpson’s rules, Gaussian integration formulas 
Numerical differentiation and integration 
the Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel methods 
diagonally dominant systems 
Solution of a system of linear equations 
order of convergence of a method 
the fixed- point iterative method 
----------------Page (40) Break----------------
Arabic —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (41) Break----------------
(لحكیما قیفوت لعماأ ىلع لتركیزا عم لمسرحیةا رتطو) 
Development of Drama with special focus on services of Toufeeq al Hakeem   
Section 3 
لمعاصرا لعربيا دبلأا)(  Contemporary Arabic literatur       e 
Spanish poetry, with special reference to poetry of Ibn e Zaidoon (             E.    ونیدز بنا  رعش  ةص اخ  لأندلسيا  لشعرا)
and Al-Qazi al Fazil. (لفاضلا  لقاضيا  و  لجاحظوا لمقفعا بنا و لعمیدا بنا بسلوأ ةصاخ لمختلفةا سالیبھأ و لنثرا) 
Prose and its different styles with special emphasis on style of IbnulAmeed, IbnulMuqaffa, Al-Jahiz 
یةھلعتاا بيوأ اسنو 
Tammam, Abu Nuwas, AbulAtahia (       بيأ و متما بيأ و لمتنبيا رعش ىلع لتركیزا عم تھامیز و لعباسيا لشعرا اضغرأ)
Purposes and features of Abbasid poetry with special           emphasis on the poetry of Mutanabbi, Abu 
Abbasid and Spanish Period (                  لأندلسيوا س لعباا لعصرا)  
Erotic and platonic ghazal (ريلعذا  للغزوا لصریحا للغزا) 
Art of Flyting (لنقائضا نف) 
Umayyad Period (يلأموا لعصرا) 
Section 2 
Poetry at the Dawn of Islam ( ملإسلاا رصد رصع يف لشعرا) 
Impact of Quran and Hadith on the subsequent literature. (لعربيا دبلأا يف لحدیثا و آنلقرا ثرأ) 
لكریما آنلقرا نم لأمثلةا 
Eloquence and Rhetoric of Holy Quran with examples from Quranic verses. ( عم ھتغلاب و آنلقرا ةحاصف)
ملإسلاا رصد رصع)( B. Dawn of Islam ت لمعلقاا ىلع لتركیزا عم هیاامز 
Purposes and features of pre- Islamic poetry special reference to Mu’allaqat. ( و ليھلجاا لشعرا اضغرأ)
Literary market s in pre-Islamic ArabsespeciallyUkkaz ( ظعكا قسو ةصاخ ليھلجاا لعصرا يف دبلأا اقسوأ) 
Influence of poets and poetry in Jahiliia period. (  ليھلجاا  لعصرا  يف  آءلشعرا و لشعرا ثرأ) 
A. Pre-Islamic period (ليھلجاا لعصرا) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
----------------Page (42) Break----------------
Section 5 
نم:ءتض یا َ انئ اكف الىلھُدال د  و)  َ...لىإ 
ُ     ُ ُ
 
Verses from ode of Ahmad Shouqi(1 -10) (ت زحر  أمو  َ ن الأ نادو  َ اءحوّ 
       
َ
نم:يتاص ح ت َ ج عتُل ن فسیف ا تَّ ھ مرَ )...لىإ 
ُ       
Verses from poetry of Hafiz Ibrahim (1 -10) ) ت ف یال یت كُمت أتون ب الك ل ما  
 
نم:ق ولُھ وبج نب یھا َ  ةالوُشاىی سع ...لىإ  
 
ُ
Verses from poetry of Ka’b bin Zuhair (33-40) )ُلیفلاعُم سی ول امعُم َ س أو َ ىرأ 
   
َ  َ
نم:عتمرنااعناافإماتعرضو) ...لىإ 
Verses from poetry of Hassan bin Thabit (14  -28) (ءآلعرضمحمدمنكموق  
ىلإ...نم:ةكثیر رموأ يف عناصی لا منو)  
Verses fromQaseedah of Zuhair bin AbiSulma (50 -62). (ملدوا  للحما  رةصو لاإ قبی ملف  
نم: لحبیبومنزىقفانبكمنذكر)...لىإ 
Verses from ode of ImraulQais (1                - 10) (   جلجل ارةلاسیمایومبدو   
G. Poetry for Arabic paper                لھندیةا  رةلقاا ھبش يف 
(Ghulam Ali Azad in poetry and Shah WaliUllah in prose) ( لعربيا دبلأا رتطو):لنثرا يف ﷲ ا ليو هشا و لشعرا يف آزاد يلع مغلا 
Development of Arabic literature in the Sub-Continent 
Section 4 
لخطابةا) 
Art of Oratory from pre-Islamic era to Umayyad period (يلأموا لعصرا لىإ ليھلجاا لعصرا نم  
لعربيا دبلأا يف لنقدا) 
Criticism from pre-Islamic era to the 4th Islamic Century (يلھجرا بعالرا نلقرا لىإ ليھلجاا لعصرا نم  
F. Common Topics of different periods یماھبرإ  ظ فاح  و  يقوش  حمد أ  رعش 
Poetry with special focus on poetry of Ahmad Shouqi                      and Hafiz Ibraheem (          ىلع  لتركیزا  عم  لشعرا  ص ئاص خ)
رتیمو  دمحمو   دنع  ةلقصیرا  لقصص ا  نم  ذجنمو  عم  ةلقصیرا 
Development of short story with special focus on short stories of MahmoodTaimoor (                  لقصةا  رتطو)
ظ محفو  ب یجن  و  نیسح  ھط  ت یاروا  ىلع  لتركیزا  عم  یةوالرا 
Development of Novel with special reference to the novels of Taha Husain and NageebMahfooz ( رطوت)
----------------Page (43) Break----------------
                                                        
     Active and passive voice. ( ھیف لمزیدوا دلمجرا --للمجھوا يلمبنا و ملمعلوا لمبنيا لفعلا— يلمتعدا و زمللاا لفعلا--قلإشتقاا) 
     Transitive and Intransitiveverb 
     Mazeed-feeh 
     Mujarrad 
     Etymology (roots) 
ھیف  لمزیدوا دلمجرا --للمجھو ا  لمبنيا  و  ملمعلوا  لمبنيا  لفعلا— يلمتعدا--قلإشتقاا) 
Etymology (roots), Mujarrad, Mazeed -feeh, Transitive and Intransitiveverb, Active and passive  voice. (   و  زمللاا لفعلا
Morphology (ف لصرا)  
     "لجمعا و لتثنیةوا دلمفرا" 
      ابلإعرا— لمبنيوا بلمعرا" ( لجملةا مقساأ):لإسمیةا و لفعلیةا --لإسما  مقساأ   
لجمعا  و  لتثنیةوا دلمفرا","ابرلإعا— لمبنيوا ب لمعرا" ( لجملةا مقساأ):لإسمیةا و 
“Singular, Dual and Plural”, “Mu’rab and Mabni”), Case-Ending. " لفعلیةا --لإسما مقساأ :ةلنكرا و لمعرفةا" ,"لمذكرا و لمؤنثا" 
Kinds of Sentence (Nominal and Verbal), kinds of Noun (“Proper and Common”, “Masculine and Feminine”, 
Syntax (لنحوا)  
نم:ی ت ھااج ماحٍم ن غ ود  ِّر َ ب یل ن م ) ...لىإ H. Arabic Grammar( لعربیةا عداقو) 
 
Verses from Qaseedah of Imam Al Booseri (15-24) (لح ك مالخ ص م واید  َ ك ف َ ر ع ت َ ت ن َ أ ف  
  ُ     
----------------Page (44) Break----------------
                                                        
Balochi —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (45) Break----------------
     Seed dispersal 
     development of Embryo and Endosperm 
     fertilization 
     pollination mechanism 
     Micro and megasporogenesis 
dispersal 
Micro and megasporogenesis, pollination mechanism, fertilization, development of Embryo and Endosperm, Seed 
Primary and secondary tissues. Meristems. Secondary growth in dicot stem. Anatomy of leaf, stem and root 
Anatomy and Embryology 
Section 2 
Gymnosperms. Ontogeny and structure of seed, classification and economic importance of Gymnosperms 
General account with special reference to structure, life history and affinities of both Pteridophytes and 
Peteridophyta and Gymnosperms 
     Evolution of Gametophyte and Sporophyte 
     Structure and reproduction of bryophytes 
Structure and reproduction of bryophytes, Evolution of Gametophyte and Sporophyte 
Bryology 
economically important crops and general principles of their control 
Structure, Reproduction, Classification and Economic importance of the main groups of Fungi. Diseases of 
Mycology and Plant Pathology 
     Life History and Economic importance of the main groups of Algae 
     Structure 
     Classification 
     Distribution 
Distribution, Classification, Structure, Life History and Economic importance of the main groups of Algae 
Phycology 
Algae, Fungi and Bryophytes 
Section 1 
Botany —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (46) Break----------------
     cell to cell communication 
     chemistry of cell wall and cell membrane 
     cellular morphology 
     Cell cycle 
cell culture, cell senescence and cell death 
Cell cycle, cellular morphology, chemistry of cell wall and cell membrane, cell to cell communication, plant tissue and 
Cytology 
Section 4 
methods. Deforestation. Biodiversity conservation.Pollution 
Causes and reclamation of soil salinity and water logging in Pakistan. Soil erosion, its control and soil conservation 
food chains and food webs. Biogeochemical cycles (Hydrological and Nitrogen). Succession 
ecosystems and their productivity, ecological energetics, Pyramids (of numbers, biomass and energy), trophic levels, 
Influence of climatic, edaphic and biotic factors on plant growth. Vegetation sampling techniques. Concepts of 
Ecology 
     Mechanism of oxidative phosphorylation 
     Kreb cycle 
     Glycolysis 
Glycolysis, Kreb cycle, Mechanism of oxidative phosphorylation 
Respiration 
     Mechanism of photophosphorylation 
     CO2 fixation 
     Light reaction 
     Plant pigments 
Plant pigments, Light reaction, CO2 fixation, Mechanism of photophosphorylation 
Photosynthesis 
Photoperiodism, Vernalization. Dormancy and Seed germination.Enzymes 
absorption by roots, transpiration. Role of essential mineral elements and their uptake. Plant hormones. 
Plant water relations, Osmotic Quantities, component potentials of water and their role in transport, water 
Plant Physiology 
Section 3 
angiosperm families 
bio-systematic, chemotaxonomy and numerical taxonomy. General characters and economic importance of common 
plant taxonomy 
Systems of classification. Rules of botanical nomenclature. Concepts of speciation. Introduction to modern trends in 
Taxonomy of Angiosperms 
----------------Page (47) Break----------------
     Genetic code 
     Transcription 
     DNA replication 
     DNA as hereditary material 
     Nucleic acids 
engineering and its application, Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO) 
Nucleic acids, DNA as hereditary material, DNA replication, Transcription, Genetic code, Protein synthesis, Genetic 
Molecular Biology 
     Parallel Evolution and Natural selection 
     Divergent Evolution 
     Convergent Evolution 
     Evolution of life 
     Evolutionary history 
     Introduction of Evolution 
Evolution and Natural selection 
Introduction of Evolution, Evolutionary history, Evolution of life, Convergent Evolution, Divergent Evolution, Parallel 
Evolution 
Section 5 
     DNA repair 
     Mutations 
     Chromosomal aberrations 
     Sex-linked inheritance 
     Epistasis and pleiotropy 
     Gene interaction 
     Polygenic inheritance 
     Multiple Alleles 
     Mendelian Genetics 
inheritance, Chromosomal aberrations, Mutations, DNA repair 
Mendelian Genetics, Multiple Alleles, Polygenic inheritance, Gene interaction, Epistasis and pleiotropy, Sex-linked 
Genetics 
     Nucleus 
     Vaculoes 
     Glyoxysomes 
     Ribosomes 
     Plastids 
     Endoplasmic reticulum 
     Golgi bodies 
     Mitochondria 
Mitochondria, Golgi bodies, Endoplasmic reticulum, Plastids, Ribosomes, Glyoxysomes, Vaculoes, Nucleus 
Ultra-structure of various cell organelles 
     cell senescence and cell death 
     plant tissue and cell culture 
----------------Page (48) Break----------------
                                                        
     Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO) 
     Genetic engineering and its application 
     Protein synthesis 
----------------Page (49) Break----------------
     and Results 
     Causes 
Causes, and Results 
The Glorious Revolution (1688) 
Part –I (Marks 50) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
British History —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (50) Break----------------
Internal policies 
Robert Peel and return of Torries 
Chartest Movement 
Colonization 
Liberalism 
Socialism 
The Methodist Movement 
Party Politics 
Effects on Political and Social Life of Britain 
Causes 
Industrial and Agricultural Revolution 
Impact on Britain 
Britain and Napoleonic Wars 
Causes 
The French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars 
Section 3 
The Old Colonial system 
Union of England and Ireland 
The Union of England and Scotland 
Section 2 
American War of Independence (1776) 
Robert Walpole and Whig Oligarchy 
Jacobite Rebellions (1715 and 1745) 
Hanoverian Era (1714-1790) 
Queen Anne (1702-1714) 
William III and Mary II (1689-1702) 
----------------Page (51) Break----------------
     War Conferences 
     Churchill 
Churchill, War Conferences 
Causes and events 
Britain ,World War II and its Aftermath 
Section 5 
Appeasement and Rearmament Part –II (Marks 50) 
The Great Depression 
League of Nations 
Effects of War on Britain 
Britain and Peace settlement 
Causes 
Britain, World War I and its Aftermath 
The Origins of Labor Party 
Domestic and Foreign Policies (1901-1910) 
Edwardian Era (1901-1910) 
Great Britain and Free Trade 
     Gladstone and Problems in Ireland 
     Disraeli 
Disraeli, Gladstone and Problems in Ireland 
Foreign Policy 
Liberals 
Internal Reforms 
Victorian Era (1837-1901) 
Section 4 
Irish Problem 
----------------Page (52) Break----------------
                                                        
Reforms under Cameroun 
Global Financial Crisis 2008 and the Great Britain 
     War on Terror and his Policies 
     Tony Blair “New Labour” Economic Crunch 
Tony Blair “New Labour” Economic Crunch, War on Terror and his Policies 
Formation of EU 
European Common Market and the Great Britain 
John Major and his Policies 
Falkland War 
Foreign Policy 
Society and culture 
Internal Policy 
Thatcherism to Cameron (1979-2012) 
Foreign Policy 
Internal Policies and EEC 
Decolonization of the British Empire 
NATO 
Creation of Common Wealth 
Great Britain and Cold War 
Reforms of Labour Government 
Effects of war 
Creation of U.N.O 
----------------Page (53) Break----------------
     and Decision Making 
     Goal Setting 
     Management Planning 
Management Planning, Goal Setting, and Decision Making 
Organizational Internal-External Environment 
     Management Skills 
     Management Roles 
     Four Management Functions 
Four Management Functions, Management Roles, Management Skills 
     and Management in Organizations 
     Management 
     Defining Organization 
Defining Organization, Management, and Management in Organizations 
Management 
Section 1 
Business Administration —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (54) Break----------------
     and Fair Treatment in HR Management 
     Justice 
     Ethics 
Ethics, Justice, and Fair Treatment in HR Management 
Compensation and Benefits 
Establishing Strategic Pay Plans 
     Processes 
     Methods 
Performance Management and Appraisal: Methods and Processes 
Training and Development 
Recruitment and Selection 
Planning and Forecasting Personnel Needs 
Process and Methods of Job Analysis 
Functions of HRM 
Role of Human Resource Management in Organizational Performance 
HR Management 
Section 2 
Leadership and Motivation 
Managing Change and Innovation 
Designing Adaptive Organizations 
Developing Organizational Structure and Design 
Strategy Formulation and Implementation 
Strategic Management Process 
----------------Page (55) Break----------------
     Capital Budgeting Significance of Capital budgeting 
Capital Budgeting Significance of Capital budgeting, Cash flow calculations 
     Read and analyze Statement of Cash flow 
     Difference between profit and cash flow 
     Making financial forecasts 
     Making cash budgets 
     Cash flow and Budgeting Significance of budgeting 
between profit and cash flow, Read and analyze Statement of Cash flow 
Cash flow and Budgeting Significance of budgeting, Making cash budgets, Making financial forecasts, Difference 
     return for valuation 
     Relevant risk 
     Discounting process for price determination 
     Calculating WACC 
     CAPM 
     Security Market Line 
     Diversifiable vs. Market risk 
Relevant risk and return for valuation 
vs. Market risk, Security Market Line and CAPM, Calculating WACC, Discounting process for price determination, 
standard deviation and coefficient of variation, Risk aversion and required rate of return, Portfolio risk: Diversifiable 
     Standalone risk 
     Investment return and expected rate of return 
     Return and Introduction to Pricing Measures of Risks and return 
     Risk 
return, Standalone risk 
Risk, Return and Introduction to Pricing Measures of Risks and return, Investment return and expected rate of 
decision making, Evaluating credit, management, profitability, risk etc using financial statements 
including common size, ratio, comparative and index number trend analysis, Forecasting financials for future 
Analysis and Interpretation of Financial Statements Reading the financial statements, Horizontal and vertical analysis 
     Loan amortization 
     discrete and continuous 
discrete and continuous, Loan amortization 
future value of cash flow streams, Compounding Interest 
timelines, Annuities, Perpetuities and mixed stream of cash flows, with and without growth, Present value and 
of market interest rate, Role of Time value of money in finance, Concept of future value and present value, Making 
Time Value of Money Cost of money and the factors effecting the cost, Interest rate fundamentals and determinants 
development, Organizational goals and shareholder wealth maximization perspective 
real assets and financial assets, Types of Financial Markets, Role of capital and money markets in economic 
An overview of Financial Management Introduction and significance of financial markets, Differentiation between 
Financial Management 
Section 3 
Labor Relations and Collective Bargaining 
----------------Page (56) Break----------------
     Service location Strategy 
     Center of Gravity Method 
     Load-Distance Methods 
     Factor Rating Method 
     Methods for Evaluating Location Alternatives 
     Location Strategies Factors Affecting Location Decisions 
Method, Load-Distance Methods, Center of Gravity Method, Service location Strategy 
Location Strategies Factors Affecting Location Decisions, Methods for Evaluating Location Alternatives, Factor Rating 
     Single & Multiple Product Break Even Analysis for Capacity Planning 
     Leading vs Lagging Strategies 
     Capacity Planning 
     Managing demand 
     Capacity considerations 
     Capacity Cushion 
     Capacity Planning Design & Effective Capacity 
Capacity Planning, Leading vs Lagging Strategies, Single & Multiple Product Break Even Analysis for Capacity Planning 
Capacity Planning Design & Effective Capacity, Capacity Cushion, Capacity considerations, Managing demand, 
     Process Re-engineering 
     Service process design 
     Process Charts 
     Flow Diagrams 
     Process Mapping 
     Process Analysis and Design 
     Process Strategy Four Process Strategies 
Charts, Service process design, Process Re-engineering 
Process Strategy Four Process Strategies, Process Analysis and Design, Process Mapping, Flow Diagrams, Process 
Aligning Core Competencies with CSF 
Operations Strategy in Global Environment Developing mission & OM strategies, Critical Success Factors (CSF), 
goods and services 
Significance and contributions of OM in the field of management. Future trends in OM and differences between 
Operations & Productivity Operations Management (OM) as one of the Three Core Functions in an Organization. 
Operations and Supply Chain Management a. Operations Management 
Section 4 
     Capital Rationing 
     calculating appropriate discount rate 
     Finding optimal capital structure 
     Return 
     MIRR 
     IRR 
     NPV 
calculating appropriate discount rate, Capital Rationing 
incremental cash flows, Capital budgeting decision rules: NPV, IRR, MIRR, Return, Finding optimal capital structure, 
     Cash flow calculations 
----------------Page (57) Break----------------
     IT in supply chain management Role of IT in supply chain management 
relationship management, Risk management in IT, Supply chain IT in practice 
IT in supply chain management Role of IT in supply chain management, Customer relationship management, Supplier 
     Managerial levers to achieve coordination 
     Collaborative planning forecasting and replenishment 
     Vendor managed inventory 
     Supply chain coordination Obstacles in coordination 
and replenishment, Managerial levers to achieve coordination 
Supply chain coordination Obstacles in coordination, Vendor managed inventory, Collaborative planning forecasting 
     accurate response strategy 
     Information sharing in supply chains 
     Demand collaboration 
     Balancing supply and demand Bullwhip effect 
response strategy 
Balancing supply and demand Bullwhip effect, Demand collaboration, Information sharing in supply chains, accurate 
     Pricing as a driver 
     Sourcing as a driver 
     Transportation as a driver 
     Information as a driver 
     Inventory as a driver 
     Supply chain drivers Facilities as a driver 
Sourcing as a driver, Pricing as a driver 
Supply chain drivers Facilities as a driver, Inventory as a driver, Information as a driver, Transportation as a driver, 
     Supply chain lead time 
     Supply chain quality 
     Supply chain cost 
     Challenges in achieving strategic fit 
     Supply chain performance Achieving strategic fit 
quality, Supply chain lead time 
Supply chain performance Achieving strategic fit, Challenges in achieving strategic fit, Supply chain cost, Supply chain 
phases in supply chains 
management, Objectives, Importance, Examples of supply chain management and logistics management, Decision 
Introduction to supply chain management and logistics management What is supply chain management and logistics 
b. Supply Chain Management 
Models, Fixed Period Systems, Continuous Review Systems, Basic EOQ Inventory Model, Safety Stock, Service Level 
Inventory Management Role of Inventory in Operations, ABC analysis, Record accuracy, Cycle counting, Inventory 
     Assembly Line Balancing 
     Retail Layout 
     Office Layout 
     Process- Oriented Layouts 
     Fixed Position Layout 
     Layout Design 
     Layout Strategies Types of Layout 
Retail Layout, Assembly Line Balancing 
Layout Strategies Types of Layout, Layout Design, Fixed Position Layout, Process- Oriented Layouts, Office Layout, 
----------------Page (58) Break----------------
                                                        
Integrated marketing communications 
Managing distribution channels 
Pricing 
Product life cycle 
Branding 
Managing marketing information 
Market segmentation 
Analyzing consumer markets 
Scanning the marketing environment 
Developing marketing strategies and plans 
Introduction to marketing 
Marketing 
Section 5 
     Supply chain IT in practice 
     Risk management in IT 
     Supplier relationship management 
     Customer relationship management 
----------------Page (59) Break----------------
Chemistry —  200 Marks 
----------------Page (60) Break----------------
homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, acid-base and enzyme catalysis. 
of phase rule, one component systems, two component systems and their examples, Catalysis; 
properties, classification and preparation of colloidal systems. Surfactants, Phase rule; Gibbs equation 
adsorption isotherms, Langmuir adsorption isotherm and Freundlich Adsorption isotherm. Colloids; 
determination of surface area. Adsorption and absorption; physical adsorption and chemisorption, 
Surface Chemistry and Catalysis Properties of liquids, physical and chemical properties of surface, 
Section 2 
complex reactions. 
graphical methods), collision theory, transition state theory, Arrhenius equation and rate equations of 
experimental techniques for determination of order of reaction (integration, half-life, initial rate and 
zero, first, second and third order reactions with same initial concentrations, half- lives of reactions, 
Chemical Kinetics The rate and molecularity of reactions, Factors affecting rate of a chemical reaction, 
Gibbs Helmholtz equation, fugacity and activity. 
law, The Born-Haber cycle, relations of entropy and Gibbs free energy with equilibrium constant, 
volume, reversible and non-reversible processes, spontaneous and non-spontaneous processes, Hess’s 
thermochemistry, calorimetry, heat capacities and their dependence on temperature, pressure and 
critical phenomena and critical constants, four laws of thermodynamics and their applications, 
Thermodynamics Equation of states, ideal and real gases, the Van der Waals equation for real gases, 
corrosion and its prevention. 
measurement of pH, electrolytic cells, potentiometry, reference and indicator electrodes, fuel cells, 
electrode potentials, liquid junction potential, electrochemical series, Nernst’s equation, 
determination of activities, Redox reactions, spontaneous reactions, electrochemical cells, standard 
and transport number, conductometric titrations, Debye-Hückel theory and activity coefficient, 
Electrochemistry Ions in solution, measurement of conductance and Kohlrausch’s law, mobility of ions 
for particle in one and three dimensional box. 
Eigen functions and Eigen values, Hamiltonian operator, Schrödinger wave equation and its solution 
uncertainty principle, wave functions and Born interpretation of wave functions, probability density, 
atomic model, wave and particle nature of light matter, de Broglie’s equation, Heisenberg’s 
Atomic Structure and Quantum Chemistry Electromagnetic spectrum, photoelectric effect, Bohr’s 
Paper-I (100 Marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
----------------Page (61) Break----------------
reactions of alkanes, alkenes and alkynes. 
Saturated and Unsaturated Hydrocarbon Nomenclature, Physical properties, Preparation and 
bonding, Inductive effect, Dipole moment, Resonance, Hyperconjugation. 
Basic Concepts of Organic Chemistry Bonding and orbital hybridization, Localized and delocalized 
half-life and decay law. Paper-II (100 Marks) 
characteristics of actinides, electronic structure, oxidation state and position in the periodic table, 
lanthanide contraction, oxidation states, spectral and magnetic properties and uses. General 
extraction and general principles of separation, electronic structure and position in the periodic table, 
stability constants of coordination complexes. General characteristics of Lanthanides, occurrence, 
Jahn-Teller theorem, magnetic properties, spectral properties, isomerism, stereochemistry and 
theory, Valence bond theory (VBT), Crystal field theory (CFT) and Molecular orbital theory (MOT). 
coordination number 2-10, Chelates and chelate effect. Theories of coordination complexes; Werner's 
ground of coordination chemistry, nomenclature and structure of coordination complexes with 
Chemistry of d and f-block elements General characteristics of d-block elements, historical back 
Section 3 
industrial applications 
of pH, pKa, pKb and buffer solutions. Theory of indicators, solubility, solubility product, common ion effect and their 
base theories including soft and hard acid and base (SHAB) concept, relative strength of acids and bases, significance 
Acids and Bases Brief concepts of chemical equilibrium, acid 
representative compounds. 
elements with emphasis on oxygen, carbon, chlorine, silicon, nitrogen, phosphorus and some of their 
electron deficient compounds, hydrogen bonding, Physical and chemical properties of p-block 
orbital theory (MOT) applied to diatomic molecules, delocalized approach to bonding, bonding in 
prediction of molecular shapes using valence-shell electron-pair repulsion (VSEPR) model, Molecular 
approach, theories of chemical bonding, valance bond theory (VBT), hybridization and resonance, 
Basic Inorganic Chemistry Types of chemical bonding, ionic and covalent bonding, localized bond 
separation and characterization of proteins. 
layer, column and ion exchange chromatographies). Principle of electrophoresis and its application as 
theory of chromatography, classification and overview of chromatographic techniques (paper, thin 
analytical separations, multiple batch extraction and counter current distribution. Chromatography; 
Separation Methods Solvent extraction; theory of solvent extraction; solvent extraction of metals, 
Statistical tests. 
deviation/relative standard deviation, confidence limits, Gaussian distribution, least square method, 
measurement errors, analysis of variance (ANOVA), arithmetic mean, median, mode, standard 
Fundamentals of Chemometrics Sampling, significant figures, stoichiometric calculations, 
----------------Page (62) Break----------------
     urea cycle 
     etc 
     transamination and transmethylation 
     deamination 
     decarboxylation 
synthesis. Catabolism of nucleosides, DNA polymerases and other enzymes involves in metabolism 
decarboxylation, deamination, transamination and transmethylation, etc., urea cycle, creatine and uric acid 
reaction of amino acids 
Biosynthesis of triglycerides, phosphides, steroids and bile acids and ketone bodies. Biochemical 
Glycolysis; citric acid cycle, gluconeogenesis, glycogenesis, glycogenolysis and photosynthesis. 
Metabolism Digestion; absorption and transport of proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids. 
inhibition, regulatory enzymes and allosteric enzymes. 
nature of active site, mechanism of enzyme action, kinetics of single substrate reactions, enzyme 
Structure and biological significance of nucleic acids. Enzymes; Enzyme-substrate interactions and 
secondary tertiary and quaternary structures. Nucleic Acids; Chemical composition of nucleic acids. 
acids. Biological significance. Proteins; Classification. Properties and biological significance. Primary, 
mechanism. Amino Acids; Classification of amino acids. Physical and chemical properties of amino 
biological importance of lipids. Significance of lipids in biological membranes and transport 
functions of starch, glycogen, cellulose, and cell wall polysaccharides. Lipids; Classification and 
Biomolecules Carbohydrates; Monosaccharides, oligosaccharides and polysaccharides, biological 
spectroscopy and Mass spectroscopic techniques. 
Organic Spectroscopy Theory, Principle, instrumentation and applications of UV/Visible, 1H NMR, IR 
Optical activity, Stereoselectivity and stereospecificity. Resolution of racemic mixtures. 
Stereochemistry Molecular chirality.Types of stereoisomers. R,S configuration and E,Z designation. 
and elimination reactions. 
reactions. Elimination reactions, Zaitsev rule and Hofmann rule. Competition between Substitution 
Aliphatic nucleophilic substitution and elimination reactions Mechanism of nucleophilic substitution 
Section 4 
carboxylic acids and their derivatives including acid halides, acid anhydrides, esters and amides. 
acidity of carboxylic acids and effect of substituents on their acidity, preparation and reactions of 
mechanism of aldehydes and ketones and their applications. Carboxylic acids and their derivatives, 
Synthetic applications of Grignard reagent. Carbonyl compounds, preparations and reaction 
with focus on reaction mechanism and applications. Preparation and reactions of alkyl halides. 
Chemistry of Functional Groups Preparation and properties of alcohols, phenols, ethers, and amines 
and reactivity. 
substitution reaction, Activating and deactivating substituents, Effect of substituents on orientation 
Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds Benzene structure, Aromaticity, Mechanism of electrophilic 
----------------Page (63) Break----------------
                                                        
detergents. 
Chemical Industries Manufacturing and processing of sugar, cement, glass, paper, fertilizers, soap and 
Section 5 
     DNA polymerases and other enzymes involves in metabolism 
     creatine and uric acid synthesis. Catabolism of nucleosides 
----------------Page (64) Break----------------
Computer Science —  200 Marks 
----------------Page (65) Break----------------
Encryption Algorithms (DES, RSA) 
Search trees, AVL Trees, Two-Three Trees), Graphs, Heuristic (Guided) Search, Genetic Algorithms, 
Queues, Hash Tables (Linear Probing, Bucketing, Chaining), Recursion, Trees (Binary Trees, Binary 
Algorithms (Linear Search, Binary Search, Bubble Sort, Merge Sort, Quick Sort, Heap Sort), Stacks and 
Abstract Data Types, Implementation of Stacks and Queues using ADTs, Searching and Sorting 
Charts, Designing Algorithms, Algorithm Analysis and Asymptotic Notations, Classification of Lists, 
Algorithm, Parameters for selecting an algorithm, Algorithm Representations, Pseudo Code and Flow 
Algorithms & Data Structures Fundamental concepts, Properties of algorithms, Criteria for an 
Exception Handling Section-B (50 Marks) 
Template Library (STL), Files & streams (sequential access files, random access files), File processing, 
Polymorphism (virtual function, pure-virtual functions, abstract class, abstract super class), Standard 
Inheritance (single inheritance, multiple inheritances, protected members, method over-riding), 
const), Operator overloading (stream insertion, stream extraction, binary operator, unary operator), 
objects, data members, member functions), Classes Advanced ( friends, static, composition, this, 
abstraction, encapsulation, inheritance, Polymorphism), Introduction to Classes and Objects ( classes, 
Object Oriented Paradigm Object Oriented Programming Concepts ( Object-oriented paradigm, data 
Section 2 
and strings, Structures, unions, and bit manipulation operators. 
structures, Standard library functions, User defined functions and parameter passing, Arrays, pointers, 
structure, Data types and variable declarations, Standard I/O streams, and statements, Control 
Design, Components of a programming language, Program development and execution, Program 
Programming Fundamentals Basic programming elements and concepts, Problem Solving & Program 
and bioinformatics; IEEE / ACM computing disciplines guidelines. 
science, software engineering, information technology, information systems, computer engineering 
Ethical Challenges, Viruses, Plagiarism, Intellectual Property Rights, Difference between computer 
Messengers, and Internet , Computers & Society, Information Security/Privacy, Computer Crimes and 
documents, Usage of Word processors, Spread sheets, Power-Point, Email, Search Engines, Browsers, 
User interfaces, Major Software Issues, Creation, formatting, and maintenance of Computer 
Hardware, Software, and Programming languages, Information Representation & Number Systems, 
System, Input & Output devices and their types, Storage Media and their types, Types of Computer 
Computing, Computer HW and SW Details, Computer System Components and Communication 
Introduction to Computing Introduction to Information Technology and Computers, History of 
Paper-I (100 Marks) Section-A (50 Marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
----------------Page (66) Break----------------
networks, naming, Content distribution networks, Peer to peer systems, DHTs, Network Attacks) 
Link layer addressing, LAN Technologies, Bridges and Hubs, Multiple Access), Special topics (Security, Overlay 
Algorithms, X.25, Frame relay and ATM, MPLS), Physical & Link Layer Functionalities (Error Detection & Control, ARQ, 
Special IP Addresses ARP, IPv6, ICMP, Network Address Translation (NAT), Internet Routing Protocols and 
Congestion avoidance and control), Network Layer (The Internet Protocol, IPv4 Datagram, Internet Address Classes, 
Transport Layer (Multiplexing in UDP and TCP, Connectionless Transport: UDP, Reliable data transfer and TCP, 
OSI and TCP/IP, Application Layer (Network application architectures, HTTP, FTP, Email, DNS, P2P applications), 
switching, Packet switching, Multiplexing (TDM, FDM), Layering 
Computer Communications & Networks Basic Concepts and Classification of Networks, Circuit 
Parallelism And Superscalar Processors, Parallel Processing, Multi-Processor and Multi-core Systems 
Processor Structure & Function, Control Unit Operation, Micro-programmed Control, Instruction-Level 
Machine, Instruction Representation, Machine Instruction Characteristics, Instruction Processing, 
Types, Types of Buses, Memory Organization and Structure, information flow and execution in 
Memory, Input /Output System, Computer Arithmetic Microprocessor and its Bus Structure, I/O 
representation, Computer Function and Interconnections, Cache Memory, Internal Memory, External 
Machine instructions, Instruction execution cycle, CISC vs. RISC, Parallelism, Internal/External data 
Evolution & Performance Languages, Architectural levels, Virtual machines, Processor types, Metrics, 
Computer Organization & Architecture Fundamental concepts, Overview of a Computer System, 
optimization) Paper-II (100 Marks) Section-A (50 Marks) 
Redundant code, Folding of Constant, Loop optimization, Peephole optimization, Problems of 
machine, Run-time storage management, Register allocation), Code optimization (Elimination of 
Intermediate Code Generation, Code Generation (Issues in the design of code generation, The target 
down translation), Semantic analysis (Symbol tables, Type Expressions, Type Checking of statements), 
Directed Translation (Synthesized attributes, Inherited attributes, Construction of syntax trees, Top-
sets, Predictive Parsing using LL(1) grammars, Syntax error handling and recovery strategies), Syntax 
LL(k) vs. LR(k) grammars, Top-down vs. Bottom-Up parsers, Parsing Techniques, FIRST and FOLLOW 
Regular expressions, Finite automata, Syntax Analysis (Context-free grammars and their classification, 
Classification of Compilers, Lexical Analysis (Input buffering, Specification & Recognition of tokens, 
Compiler Construction Difference among various type of Translators, Phases of Compilers, 
Section 3 
Improvement 
Software Engineering, Aspect-Oriented Software Engineering, Project Management, Process 
Specification, Software Quality Assurance, Introduction to Proofs of Correctness (LNO), Distributed 
Implementation, Software Testing, System Delivery and Maintenance, Software Evolution Formal 
Analysis Modeling, Requirements Engineering, Design Concepts, Architectural Design, Design & 
Software Engineering Software Processes, Software Process Models, Agile Software Development, 
----------------Page (67) Break----------------
                                                        
performance, operation, maintenance, security) 
Methodologies, Web site promotion and deployment, Web applications Issues (Accessibility, testing, 
CSS), Server- side programming using PHP, Web development process, Web Application Development 
Object Model), XML, RSS, API, Client-side programming using (HTML, XHTML, XML, JavaScript, and 
Sheet(CSS), CSS properties, JavaScript (Functionalities, Events, Variables, Operators), DOM(Document 
JSP model, struts, OOHDM ), Integration Architecture, Data Aspect architectures, Cascading Style 
Classifications of web architecture , Web Application layered architecture ( client server, n - layered, 
Software Architecture, Styles, Patterns, and frameworks, Components of Web Architecture, 
Documentation, Validation and verification, Management), HTML(hypertext markup language), 
non functional requirements, Requirement engineering process (Elicitation and negotiation, 
engineering, requirement engineering, requirement, types of requirements, functional requirements, 
Web Engineering & Technologies Modeling techniques for web applicati ons, Introduction to web 
Section 5 
Detection; Image Compression 
Thinning); Image Segmentation; Point Detection, Line Detection, Edge Detection and Boundary 
Noise Models; Morphological Operators (Erosion, Dilation, Opening, Closing, Skeletonization, 
Sharpening); Gray-scale and Color Images; Color Models (RGB, CMYK and HIS); Image Restoration; 
(Translation, Scaling, Rotation, Shear); Image Histogram; Image Enhancement (Contrast, Smoothing, 
Image Sampling and Quantization; Image Storage and Operati ons; Image Transformations 
and Artificial Intelligence; Image Sensing and Acquisition Techniques; Representing Digital Image; 
Digital Image Processing The relation between Image Processing, Computer Graphics, Computer Vision 
Database Security & Access Control 
Query Optimization, Transaction processing, Object- Oriented Databases, Distributed Databases, 
& Indexing, Indexing Structure, XML documents & Web Services, Query Processing & Evaluation, 
Mapping, PL/SQL Stored Procedures & Triggers, Functional Depende ncies and Normalization, Storage 
Constraints, Relational Data Model, SQL, Relational Algebra & Calculus, ER Model, ER to Relational 
Database Systems Introduction to Database Systems, Relational Data Model & Relational Database 
(50 Marks) 
Virtual Memory Management, File Systems (UNIX and Windows Systems), I/O Management Section-B 
Components of OS, Process Management, Process Synchronization, Deadlocks, Memory Management, 
and Operations, Classification of Operating Systems, Computing Environments, Design and 
Operating Systems Concepts Roles of an Operating System, Operating-System Evolution, Structures, 
Section 4 
----------------Page (68) Break----------------
     PLD 1955 FC 
     Federation of Pakistan vs. Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan 
Federation of Pakistan vs. Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan, PLD 1955 FC 
Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1955 Sindh 
Legal Development 
Section 4 
1985, The LFO-2002, Amendments in the 1973 Constitution 
Suspension of the Constitutions and the Martial Laws, Legal Framework Order, 1970, The PCO of 1981, The RCO of 
Independence Act 1947, Objectives Resolution 1949, Constitutions of 1956, 1962 and 1973, Abrogation and 
Principles of Constitutional Law of Pakistan, Salient feature of the Government of India Act, 1935, Indian 
Constitutional History of Pakistan 
Section 3 
France, Russia, China, Pakistan, India and Turkey. 
Principles of Constitutional Law with special reference to United Kingdom, United States of America, 
Section 2 
incrimination, double jeopardy). 
association, assembly, movement and Right to Counsel, life, property, religion, privacy, self 
Interpretation) Fundamental Human and Political Rights and Civil Liberties (freedom of speech, 
Powers), Judiciary (Independence of Judiciary, Judicial Review, Theories of Constitutional 
Rule of Law, Due Process), Constitutional Structures (Parliamentary, Presidential, Separation of 
Definition and Scope of Constitutional Law, Basic Constitutional Concepts (Constitutional Conventions, 
Section 1 
Constitutional Law —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (69) Break----------------
                                                        
     PLD 2009 SC 
     Sindh High Court Association v. Federation of Pakistan 
Sindh High Court Association v. Federation of Pakistan, PLD 2009 SC 
     PLD 2000 SC 
     Zafar Ali Shah v. General Pervez Musharraf 
Zafar Ali Shah v. General Pervez Musharraf, PLD 2000 SC 
Mahmood Khan Achakzai v. Fed. of Pakistan PLD 1997 SC 
State v. Zia ur Rehman PLD 1973 SC 
Asma Jilani v. Government of the Punjab PLD 1972 SC 
     PLD 1998 SC 
     Benazir Bhutto v. President of Pakistan 
Benazir Bhutto v. President of Pakistan, PLD 1998 SC 
Khawaja Ahmad Tariq Rahim PLD 1992 SC 
Federation of Pakistan v. Haji Saifullah Khan PLD 1989 SC 
     PLD 1988 Lah 
     Khawaja Muhammad Sharif 
Khawaja Muhammad Sharif, PLD 1988 Lah 
Benazir Bhutto v. the President of Pakistan PLD 1992 SC 
Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan PLD 1993 SC 
Hakim Khan v. Government of Pakistan PLD 1992 SC 
Begum Nusrat Bhutto v. Chief of the Army Staff PLD 1977 SC 
Usif Patel v. Crown PLD 1955 FC 
State v. Dosso PLD 1958 SC 
Reference by the Governor-General PLD 1955 FC 
----------------Page (70) Break----------------
     trial and sentencing     Role of prosecutor 
         pretrial 
 pretrial, trial and sentencing    Role of prosecutor, defense counsel, juvenile judge, juvenile probation officer 
Juvenile court process 
Role of police 
Juvenile Justice System 
Section 3 
offender, Official statistics of juvenile delinquency 
Juvenile Delinquency Meaning, definitions (Behavioral Vs Legal), Juvenile delinquent Vs status 
Islamic perspective on deviance and crime. Section-II (25 Marks) 
Labeling Theory 
Sociological Theories.    Social Disorganization theory    Strain theory    Social Control theory    Learning theory    
Psychological Theories 
Biological Theories 
Theoretical Perspectives Early explanation of criminal behavior 
Crime and Criminality 
crime, Organized crime, corporate crimes. 
Crime and Criminals Occasional criminals, Habitual criminals, Professional criminals, White-collar 
Section 2 
Economic) 
law; Crime as social problem; Deviance, Sin Vice, Evil, Norms, Values; Security (Physical, Social, 
Understanding Criminology Definition, meaning and scope of criminology; Criminology and criminal 
Introduction Basic concepts used in understanding crime, criminality and criminal behaviour. 
Section-I (25 Marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Criminology —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (71) Break----------------
     Radicalism and War on Terror 
     Terrorism 
Terrorism, Radicalism and War on Terror 
Modern Concepts in Contemporary Criminology 
UNODC, UNICEF, IPA, etc. Section-IV (25 Marks) 
International Policing and Criminal Justice Monitoring Organizations UNAFEI, INTERPOL, EUROPOL, 
Section 5 
seizure. 
Legal and Ethical Guidelines for Investigators Stop and frisk operations, Arrest procedures, Search and 
techniques, Criminal investigation analysis, 
Techniques of Investigations Gathering information from persons, Interviewing and interrogation 
Intelligence operations, Data base investigation, Electronic investigation, Forensic Investigation 
Criminal Investigation Principles of criminal investigation, Manual of preliminary investigation, 
Section 4 
of criminals. Section-III (25 Marks) 
Punitive and Reformative Treatment of Criminals Corporal punishment, Imprisonment, Rehabilitation 
     Probation and Parole 
     Prisons 
Prisons, Probation and Parole 
     problems     Role of prosecutors 
     procedures 
formal and informal    Criminal courts: procedures and problems    Role of prosecutors 
Trial and Conviction of Offenders    Agencies 
Police and its role 
The Criminal Justice System 
probation and non-punitive alternatives 
Juvenile correctional institutions 
     juvenile probation officer 
     juvenile judge 
     defense counsel 
----------------Page (72) Break----------------
                                                        
     ANF 
     FIA 
     Role of NAB 
Role of NAB, FIA, ANF 
Cyber Crime 
Money-laundering 
The role of civil society and NGOs 
Women and Minorities 
     especially of Children 
     Human Rights Abuses and Protection 
Human Rights Abuses and Protection, especially of Children 
     Organized Crime and White-Collar Crime 
     Crime and Urbanization 
Crime and Urbanization, Organized Crime and White-Collar Crime 
Gender and Crime in Urban and Rural Pakistan 
Partnership 
Modern Law Enforcement and Crime Prevention    Intelligence-led Policing    Community Policing    Private Public 
Media’s representation of Crime and the Criminal Justice System 
----------------Page (73) Break----------------
Economics —  200 Marks 
----------------Page (74) Break----------------
     Absolute 
     Growth vs. Redistributive justice 
other Issues 
Absolute and Relative Poverty, Basic Needs Approach, Sustainable Development, Environmental Degradation & 
Characteristics of under development, rethinking on the concept of development: Growth vs. Redistributive justice, 
Definition and Measurement of Development 
and development. Paper-II (100 Marks) (Economics of Pakistan) 
and poverty, sectoral (agricultural, Industry, trade and fiancé) issues and development, environment 
and Development, Theories of development, structural issues of development, Income distribution 
Economic Development Concepts of development, Human development, Historical growth process 
Policy, Balance of Payments, Foreign Exchange, International Monetary system, Custom Unions. 
Colonialism, Imperialism and International Trade, Trade Restrictions, Economic Integration, Trade 
International Trade Theories of comparative advantage and Factor Endowments, Trade & Growth, 
financing, General Equilibrium Analysis, Welfare Economics, Fiscal Policy. 
non- taxes, Incidence of different taxes, Public Debt, Objectives, methods of repayment, Deficit 
Public Financing Government expenditure, Sources of Government Revenue, Privatization, Taxes and 
Section 2 
Restructuring, IS-LM Analysis and The role of Central Bank, Money Demand and Supply. 
Mechanisms of Monetary Policy, Theory of Liquidity Preference. TVM, Capital Structure, Capital 
Concept of Reserves, Liquidity Premium, Term Structure of Interest Rate, etc; Transmission 
Control, Distinction between Goals, Operational & Intermediate Target of Central Banks Policy, 
Formulations, Systems of note issue, Credit Creation, Functions of Central Banks, Instruments of Credit 
Money and Banking Functions of Money, Quantity Theory of Money, The Fisher and Cambridge 
or three “schools of thought”), Inflation. 
Employment, Determination of equilibrium level of income and output (at least with reference to two 
Multiplier, Accelerator, Component of Aggregate Demand, Labour Demand and Supply, Un-
Macro Economics Basic Economic Concepts, National Income Accounting, Consumption Function, 
factors of production 
general equilibrium analysis (basic level), theory of the Firm, Producer’s equilibrium, Pricing of the 
elasticity of Demand & Supply, Static, Comparative Static Analysis, Distinction between partial and 
Micro Economics Consumer behaviour, Determination of market demand and supply i.e. concept of 
Paper-I (100 Marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
----------------Page (75) Break----------------
     governance & Institutions 
     A critical evaluation of the strategy of economic planning 
A critical evaluation of the strategy of economic planning, governance & Institutions 
Planning Experience of Pakistan 
Section 3 
     Environmental Degradation & other Issues 
     Sustainable Development 
     Basic Needs Approach 
     Relative Poverty 
----------------Page (76) Break----------------
                                                        
     Shortage of irrigation water 
     Balance of payment issues 
     Fiscal and trade deficits 
     Inflation 
     Income inequality 
     Unemployment 
     External debt accumulation and dependency 
     Bad governance 
     Corruption 
     Energy crisis 
inequality, Inflation, Fiscal and trade deficits, Balance of payment issues, Shortage of irrigation water 
Energy crisis, Corruption, Bad governance, External debt accumulation and dependency, Unemployment, Income 
Major Issues in Pakistan Economy 
Section 5 
Social Sector Development in Pakistan 
Energy Policy of Pakistan 
Interest Free Banking in Pakistan 
conceptual and operational aspects. International comparisons. Pakistan Experience of Privatization 
Privatization, Denationalization, Deregulation 
Section 4 
economy, costs and benefits of Foreign Aid, Role of Foreign Investment 
exports and imports, Causes of significant changes in the trends, the role of migration and remittances in Pakistan’s 
Trends in Pakistan’s Balance of Payments, Terms of Trade, Changes in direction of trade, Trends in Pakistan’s major 
Role of Foreign Trade and Aid in Economic Development 
Export led Growth Strategy in Pakistan 
Nationalization Policy, Concentration of industrial income and wealth, Evaluation of Import Substitution Policy and 
measures to promote industrial development, changing role of public sector over the plan periods, Evaluation of 
Early industrialization strategy, Creation of Financial and Development Institutions, Major monetary and fiscal 
Industrial Development in Pakistan 
changes in the Tenure System 1950— 1980, Cooperative Farming, Rural Development 
development, Green Revolution Strategy and its implications for growth and redistribution, Land Reforms and 
Changes in Agricultural Policies over plan periods, Major Monetary and Fiscal measures to promote Agricultural 
Agricultural Development in Pakistan 
----------------Page (77) Break----------------
     Tintern Abbey) 
     Lines Composed Few Miles Above 
Lines Composed Few Miles Above, Tintern Abbey) 
William Wordsworth (Resolution and Independence 
(20 marks) 
Poetry 
O’Henry (The Gift of the Magi) 
G.K.Chesterton (A Somewhat Improbable Story) 
Somerset Maugham (The Lotus-Eater) 
(10 Marks) 
Short Stories 
Section 2 
Self-Reliance) 
Ralph Waldo Emerson (The Transcendentalist 
The Prevention of Literature) 
George Orwell (Politics and the English Language 
Bertrand Russell (The Conquest of Happiness) 
(10 Marks) 
Essays 
The paper is divided into six components along with the marks allocation for each component 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
English Literature —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (78) Break----------------
Samuel Beckett (Waiting for Godot) 
Harold Pinter (The Caretaker) 
Heartbreak House ) 
Shaw (Pygmalion 
William Congreve (The Way of the World) 
Twelfth Night) 
King Lear 
Shakespeare (Hamlet 
(20 marks) 
Drama 
Section 3 
This Moment Yearning and Thoughtful) 
Are You the New Person Drawn Toward Me? 
Dry Loaf) OR Walt Whitman (As I Ponder’d in Silence 
Continual Conversation with a Silent Man 
Wallace Stevens (A Postcard from the Volcano 
The Trees) 
Continuing to Live 
Philip Larkin (Maturity 
Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock) 
Eliot (The Wasteland 
The Second Coming) 
Yeats (A Dialogue of Self and Soul 
The Lady of Shalott) 
Lord Alfred Tennyson (Ulysses 
Ode to Autumn) 
John Keats (Ode to a Nightingale 
----------------Page (79) Break----------------
                                                        
readings are suggested: 
and Criticism” and for understanding poetry and drama, particularly 20th century poetry and Drama, following 
The texts are mentioned in brackets in front of each author’s name. However, for the component on “Literary Theory 
Postcolonial Criticism Note 
Feminist criticism 
Psychoanalytic criticism 
Deconstructionism 
Marxism 
Structuralism 
Literacy Theory & Criticism (20 Marks) 
Section 4 
Nathaniel Hawthorne (The Scarlet Letter) or William Faulkner (The Sound and the Fury) 
Iris Murdoch (Under the Net) 
James Joyce (A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man) 
George Orwell (Nineteen Eighty-four) 
D.H. Lawrence (Sons and Lovers) 
Thomas Hardy (Far from the Madding Crowd) 
(20 marks) 
Novels 
Eugene O’Neill (Long Day’s Journey into Night) 
----------------Page (80) Break----------------
     China and USA (Copenhagen Accord 2009)   
     role of India  
role of India, China and USA (Copenhagen Accord 2009)   
environmental politics on climate change  
change adaptation and mitigation, Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), REDD+. Global 
Climate Change, Effects of Climate Change on natural and societal systems. Carbon foot print. Climate 
tropical and mid latitude climate,  polar climates. Climate change processes, Drivers and Indicators of 
Climate Change Climate Pattern at local, regional and global scale. Different types of climate including 
Section 3 
Rain). 
pollution problems (Greenhouse effect, Global Warming/Climate Change, Ozone Depletion, Acid 
Water Logging & Salinity, Deforestation, Desertification, Eutrophication, Global and region   al air 
Environmental Pollution Air Pollution, Water Pollution, Soil Pollution, Noise Pollution, Solid Waste, 
Environmental Biotechnology, Environmental Sociology  
Environmental Toxicology, Environmental Economics, Environmental Geology, Environmental G  eography, 
Environmental Biology, Environmental Chemistry, Environmental Physics, Environmental Microbiology, 
natural sciences to evolve a new discipline of environmental science   
Interdisciplinary nature of Environmental Science Orientation on convergence of various social and 
Section 2 
restoration.  
cities, Carrying capacity and ecological footprint. Food security and sustainable agriculture. Ecological 
Energy security (energy conservation and alternative energy resources), Ur   banization and sustainable 
Sustainable Development Issues Population growth, Poverty, Biodiversity loss and its Conservation, 
Sustainable Development 2002, Rio Summit -II, 2012, Millennium Development Goals.  
Human Environment 1972, Our Common Future 1987, Rio Summit 1992, Agenda 21, World Summit on 
Environmental Movements, Industrial and Agriculture Revolution, United Nations Conference on 
History of Environmental Thought Environment and Sustainable Development, History of 
Section 1 
Environmental Science —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (81) Break----------------
                                                        
System & Remote Sensing, Natural Resources Management. 
Management, Disaster Risk Management, Pollution Control Technologies, Geographic Information 
Management, Technological Approaches to Environmental Management, Approaches to Solid Waste 
Safety management systems (OHSAS 18000), Participatory Approaches to Environmental 
Environmental Assessment, Environmental Management Systems (ISO 14000), Occupational Health & 
Environmental Assessment and Management Environmental Impact Assessment, Strategic 
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). 
(UNFCCC), Kyoto Protocol to UNFCCC, Montreal Protocol on Substances that deplete the Ozone Layer, 
Conservation of Migratory Species (CMS), United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
International Importance Especially as Waterfowl Habitat (Ramsar Convention), Convention on the 
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), Convention on Wetlands of 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), Cartagena Protocol on Bio-safety, Convention on 
Global initiatives Brief on some of the Multilateral Environmental Agreements ratified by Pakistan, 
Section 4 
National Drinking Water Policy 2009, Sanitation Policy, National Climate Change Policy 2012 
Pollution Charge Rules, Sample Rules, Solid Waste Management Plan 2005, Hazardous Substances Rules 2005, 
Protection Act of 1997, Pak-EPA (Review of IEE/EIA) Regulations 2000, Hospital Waste Management Rules 2005, 
National Conservation Strategy of 1992, National Environmental Policy Act of Pakistan 2005, Environmental 
in Pakistan 
Environmental Governance Policy, legal and institutional frameworks for governance of environment 
----------------Page (82) Break----------------
European History —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (83) Break----------------
The Crimean War 
The nature of the Eastern question 
The Eastern Question (1804-1856) 
Cosequences 
Colonialism 
Industrial Revolution 
Socialism 
Romanticism 
Liberalism 
Nationalism 
Forces of Continuity and Change in Europe (1815-1848) 
Section 2 
Balance of Power 
The Concert of Europe and Congress System 
Metternich’s Era 
The Congress of Vienna 
The Concert of Europe (1815-1830) 
The fall of Napoleon 
The Continental system 
Creation of Empire 
Napoleon rise to power 
The consequences of Revolution 
The causes of French Revolution 
The French Revolution and Napoleonic Era (1789-1815) 
Part –I (Marks 50) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
----------------Page (84) Break----------------
     Nazism and Germany 
     Hitler 
Hitler,Nazism and Germany 
Fascism in Italy under Musssolini 
Dictatorships in Europe 
Section 4 
The League of Nations 
The War (1914-1918) and peace treaties 
The First World War and its aftermath 
The outbreak of the World War 1 Part –II (Marks 50) 
The Balkans War (1912-1913) 
Formation of Alliances and Counter Alliances 
The Origins of First World War (1890-1914) 
The triumph of Bismarck and process of unification 
The Franco- Prussian War (1870-1871) 
The Austro-Prussian War (1866) 
Diplomatic events 
The rise of Bismarck 
Unification of Germany 
Section 3 
The Process of Italian unification (1859-1871) 
Cavour and the unification of Italy 
The obstacles to unification 
The effects of the revolution of 1848 
Unification of Italy 
Consequences 
Russo Turkish War 1877 
----------------Page (85) Break----------------
     Marshal Plan 
     Economic Recovery of Europe 
Economic Recovery of Europe,Marshal Plan 
The United Nations 
The post war settlements 
Post- War Europe 
Impact of war 
The Main Events of the War 
The Second World War and its Effects on Europe 
The distraction of Czechoslovakia (1939) 
The Sudetenland Crisis (1938) 
The Arm race 
Appeasement 
Great Depression and its effects on Europe 
     Marxism Revolution and its working under Stalin 
     Russia 
Russia , Marxism Revolution and its working under Stalin 
----------------Page (86) Break----------------
                                                        
Global Economic Crisis and Europe 
Role of Europe in War against terrorism 
The European Union 
The Balkan crisis of 1990s 
The reunification of Germany 
The Gorbachev and Disintegration of USSR 
Europe (1991-2012) 
Spread of communist regimes in Europe 
Charles Degaule and France 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Agreement 
The European Economic Community (EEC) 
Warsaw Pact (1955) 
Effects of cold war 
Cold War Europe (1955-1991) 
Section 5 
Decolonization 
NATO 
German Question 
----------------Page (87) Break----------------
     too? 
     Is “Sex” socially determined 
Is “Sex” socially determined, too? 
Problematizing the category of “Sex”: Queer Theory 
Historicizing Constructionism 
Social Construction of Gender 
Status of Gender Studies in Pakistan 
Autonomy vs. Integration Debate in Gender Studies 
Multi-disciplinary nature of Gender Studies 
Difference between Gender and Women Studies 
Introduction to Gender Studies 
Section 1 
Gender Studies —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (88) Break----------------
     Development (GAD) 
     Gender 
     Development (WAD) 
     Women 
     Women in Development (WID) 
Development (GAD) 
Gender Approaches to Development: Women in Development (WID), Women and Development (WAD), Gender and 
     Structural Functionalism 
     Dependency Theory 
     World System Theory 
     Modernization Theory 
Modernization Theory, World System Theory, Dependency Theory, Structural Functionalism 
Gender Analysis of Development Theories 
Colonial and Capitalistic Perspectives of Gender 
Gender and Development 
Section 3 
on Women, Feminist Movements in Pakistan 
Feminist Movements in the West. First Wave, Second Wave and Third Wave Feminism. United Nation Conferences 
Feminist Movements 
Postmodern Feminism 
Men’s Feminism 
Psychoanalytical Feminism 
Marxist/Socialist Feminism 
Radical Feminism 
Liberal Feminism 
What is Feminism 
Feminist Theories and Practice 
Section 2 
A Debate in Gender Development 
Nature versus Culture 
Masculinities and Femininity 
----------------Page (89) Break----------------
                                                        
Shermin Ubaid Chinoy 
Mallala Yousaf Zai 
Mukhtaran Mai 
Case Studies of 
Section 5 
Strategies to Eliminate Violence against Women 
Structural and Direct Forms of Violence 
Theories of Violence against Women 
Defining Gender Based Violence 
Gender Based Violence 
Impact of Political Quota in Pakistan 
Gender Issues in Women as Representatives 
Gender Issues in Women as Candidates 
Gender Issues in Women as Voters 
Suffragist Movement 
Defining Governance 
Gender and Governance 
Section 4 
Women and Law 
Women and Employment 
Status of Women in Education 
Status of Women’s health in Pakistan 
Status of Women in Pakistan 
Globalization and Gender 
Gender Critique of Structural Adjustment Policies (SAPs) 
----------------Page (90) Break----------------
     monsoon and local winds 
     planetary 
planetary,monsoon and local winds 
Pressure belts of the world; Heat budget of the earth; Atmospheric circulation 
Elements and Factors of climate, structure and composition of atmosphere, insolation, temperature, 
Section 2 
cycles; landforms associated with fluvial, arid, glacial, coastal and Karst cycle; groundwater. 
floor spreading; plate tectonics; mountain building; volcanicity; earthquakes; concepts of geomorphic 
earth’s crust; physical conditions of the earth’s interior; geosynclines; continental drift; isostasy; sea-
Factors controlling landform development; endogenic and exogenic forces; origin and evolution of the 
Part –I (Marks 50) Physical Geography 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Geography —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (91) Break----------------
Section 5 
Patterns and Problems within urban areas. 
consequences, Models of Internal Structure of Cities, World Urban Patterns, Settlement Theories, 
Transition, World distribution of Population, Over and under Population threats and their 
Factors of Population Growth, Components of Change, Population Structure, The Demographic 
Estates, Renewable Resources, Recycling Resources, Sustainable resources. 
locations, The Industrial Revolution, Industrial Theories, Distribution of Industries and Industrial 
and Market Forces, Sustainable Agriculture, Types and Distribution of Agriculture, Factors of Industrial 
Factors effecting Agriculture, Subsistence Agriculture and population growth, Commercial Agriculture 
Section 4 
development Indicators. 
Economic Indicators, Social Indicators, Health Indicators, Development through Trade, Impacts of 
the World, Factors of Ethnic Cleansing, Ethnic Cleansing in the World, Development Indicators, 
Global Distribution, Regional conflicts, Ethnicities and Nationalities, Ethnic Conflicts, Ethnic Diversity in 
Distribution of Languages, Indo-European Languages, Origins of Religions, Diffusion of Religions, 
Origin and Diffusion of Culture, Geographic patterns of culture, Classification of Languages, World 
II (Marks 50) Human Geography 
Warming, Global Environment Patterns, Environmental Hazards and Risk Management. Part 
degradation and conservation; Nature and Types of pollution. Problems caused by pollution, Global 
Factors of climate and Environmental change. Transformation of nature by man; environmental 
Section 3 
circulation, Waves, currents and tides, their nature, causes and effects. 
distribution cause and effects, Ocean floor deposits, their characteristics and classification, Ocean 
Origin of oceans and seas, Characteristic features of the ocean basins, temperature, salinity 
Factors of global distribution of precipitation 
Types of condensation and precipitation 
Hydrological cycle 
Air masses and Fronts 
----------------Page (92) Break----------------
                                                        
     Recent issues and developments 
     Models in medical geography 
     Global patterns in health and diseases 
     Physical-environmental impacts) 
     (Socio- economic impacts 
medical geography, Recent issues and developments 
(Socio- economic impacts, Physical-environmental impacts), Global patterns in health and diseases, Models in 
recreation, The supply for tourism and recreation, The impact of tourism and recreation 
and Globalization of Capital, Geography of Tourism and Recreation, The demand for tourism and 
and the Nation-State, World Politics and International Relations, Geopolitics of uneven Development 
Politics, Geography and Political Geography, State as a Politico-Territorial Phenomenon, State, Nation 
----------------Page (93) Break----------------
     range and broad classification of major invertebrate phyla 
     Study of morphology 
Study of morphology, range and broad classification of major invertebrate phyla 
Modes of fossilization 
significance 
lithostragraphic units, biostratigraphic units and chronostratgraphic units. Introduction to fossils and their 
Geological time scale with divisions; Classification and nomenclature of stratigraphic units 
Stratigraphy and Paleontology Principles of stratigraphy; Laws of superposition and faunal succession; 
Geological Time Scale 
Isostasy 
Weathering and erosion 
Introduction to rocks and minerals 
     composition and internal structure 
     age 
     its origin 
its origin, age, composition and internal structure  
with other sciences; Earth as a member of the solar system   
Introduction to Physical Geology Introduction and scope of geology, its importance and relationship 
Part- I (50-marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Geology —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (94) Break----------------
     classification and relationship with bedding    
     terminology  
terminology, classification and rel  ationship with bedding  
materials; Folds; Faults; Joints; Foliation    
Structural Geology and Tectonics Stress  -strain concepts; factors controlling the mechanical behavior of 
normal classes of crystallographic systems   
     study 
     elements of symmetry  
elements of symmetry, study 
Introduction to crystallography 
Paragenesis; Physical and optical properties of the common silicate and non-silicate mineral groups; 
Mineralogy Classification of minerals; Study of internal structure; Polymorphism and isomorphism; 
Section 2 
Introduction to micropaleontology 
Introduction and classification of major vertebrates 
Introduction to Paleobotany 
Introduction to micro fossils 
----------------Page (95) Break----------------
     w e l l l o g s 
     o u t c r o p s 
     seismic reflections 
Data sources: seismic reflections, o u t c r o p s , w e l l l o g s , c o r e a n d s e i s m i c facies 
     concept and significance of sequence stratigraphy 
     history 
history, concept and significance of sequence stratigraphy 
Sequence Stratigraphy Introduction 
engineering works. 
geophysical techniques for exploration of mineral deposits, oil and gas, subsurface water and 
geoelectricity, tectonophysics, gravimetry, geo-thermy and geodesy; Introduction to various 
and brief description of various branches of geophysics such as seismology, geomagnetism, 
Introduction to Geophysics Definition and relation of geophysics with other sciences; Classification 
Section 3 
common rock forming minerals. Part- II (50-marks) 
and under crossed nicol including metallic under reflected light; Description of optical properties of 
Polarizing Microscope; Optical properties of opaque and non-opaque minerals in plane polarized light 
Plate Tectonics; Differentiation between metamorphism and metasomatism. Introduction to 
and facies of metamorphism; Metamorphic diffusion and differentiation; Metamorphism in relation to 
structure of igneous rocks; Introduction to metamorphism; Types of metamorphism; Grades, zones 
magma; Classification of igneous rocks; Mode of occurrences and types of extrusive rocks; Texture and 
their classification, morphology and significance; Composition, origin, differentiation and evolution of 
transportation and deposition of sediments; Texture of sedimentary rocks; Sedimentary structures, 
Petrology and Petrography Introduction, classification and description of sedimentary rocks; origin; 
Tectonic framework of Pakistan 
Wilson Cycle 
Hot spot and Mantle plumes 
Intra-oceanic islands 
Continental rifts 
Oceanic ridges 
Sea-floor spreading 
Geological evidences for continental drift 
Unconformity. Plate tectonics theory 
Lineation 
----------------Page (96) Break----------------
     glaciers and shoreline processes 
     volcanoes 
     tsunamis 
     earthquakes 
     landslides 
     Geological hazards such as floods 
Geological hazards such as floods, landslides, earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanoes, glaciers and shoreline processes 
     desertification and coastal degradation 
     Environmental controls for erosion 
Environmental controls for erosion, desertification and coastal degradation 
Global climatic changes 
Management of natural resources 
their causes and prevention. Introduction to environmental geology 
Construction materials; Mass movement 
roads, highways, tunnels, dams and bridges; Application of geophysical methods for site investigation; 
strength of rocks; Study of geological factors in relation to the construction of buildings’ foundations, 
engineering; Rock mass characteristics; Geotechnical studies of rocks and soils; Geological factors and 
Engineering and Environmental Geology Rock and soil mechanics and its application in civil 
Section 4 
Introduction to Sedimentary Basins of Pakistan 
Secondary and enhanced recovery 
     energy and pressure maintenance 
     drive mechanism 
     characteristics 
characteristics, drive mechanism, energy and pressure maintenance 
Prospecting and exploration of oil and gas; Reservoir 
and accumulation; Source sediments, reservoir rocks and trapping mechanism for oil and gas; 
Petroleum Geology The nature and classification of petroleum hydrocarbons, their origin, migration 
Types of sequences and systems tracts 
Hierarchy of sequence stratigraphic elements 
     relative sea curve 
     eustatic 
     accommodation 
     effects 
     their causes 
Sea level changes: their causes and effects, accommodation, eustatic and relative sea curve 
     c o r e a n d s e i s m i c facies 
----------------Page (97) Break----------------
                                                        
hazards and their impacts on the environment with special reference to Pakistan. 
Pakistan; Gemstones of Pakistan. Geology of Reservoirs, dams, highways and tunnels; Major natural 
based industries. Overview of Recodec Copper; Radioactive minerals and their occurrences in 
Economic and Applied Geology Metallic and Non-metallic mineral resources of Pakistan; Mineral-
energy resources of Pakistan. 
Coal rank, grade and calorific value; Coal deposits of Pakistan with reference to Thar Coal; Geothermal 
Pakistan. Origin, occurrence, and depositional environments of coal; Coal constitution and its kinds; 
and minerals; Radioactive minerals and rocks; Special reference to economic mineral deposits in 
bauxite, sulphur, barite, fluorite, clays, phosphorite, building and dimension stones; Industrial rocks 
hydrocarbons, coal, gemstones, copper, lead, zinc, iron, gold, chromite, manganese, salt, gypsum, 
Mineral and Energy Resources Introduction of geological exploration/prospecting. Brief description of 
environmental examination 
Industrial pollution, solid and liquid waste disposal, Introduction to environmental impact assessment and initial 
Clean sources of energy 
Remedial measures 
----------------Page (98) Break----------------
     Strategic Vision 
     Accountability 
     Effectiveness and Efficiency 
     Equity 
     Responsiveness 
     Transparency 
     Rule of law 
     Participation 
Strategic Vision 
Participation, Rule of law, Transparency, Responsiveness, Equity, Effectiveness and Efficiency, Accountability, 
Characteristics of Good Governance 
Definition of Good Governance 
Definition of Governance 
Origin of the term Governance 
Basic Concepts of Governance 
Section 1 
Governance & Public Policies —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (99) Break----------------
Policies 2013/14–2015/16,” that underpins almost all public policies.) 
Role of International Donors in Policy Formulation (IMF Document “Memorandum on Economic and Financial 
Provincial Government and Local Government 
Strategic Planning in Federal 
Role of Planning Commission in Policy and Planning 
Commission, The Finance Division, The Cabinet Division, and all Federal Ministries for their respective subjects) 
Cabinet, The Federal Cabinet, The Secretaries Committee, The Prime Minister’s Secretariat, The Planning 
Institutional Framework for Policy Coordination and Planning(ECNEC, Economic Coordination Committees of the 
Public Policy and Planning Institutions and their role in Planning 
Section 2 
Control of Corruption 
Rule of Law 
Regulatory Authorities & their Quality 
Government Effectiveness 
Political Stability and Absence of Violence 
Voice and Accountability 
Level in Pakistan 
Governance Indicators laid by World Bank/IMF/UNESCO/UNDP/ADB, their Explanation & Application 
Regulation Theory 
Rational Choice Theory 
Neoliberalism 
Marxism 
Institutionalism 
Libertarian Socialism 
Decentered Theory 
Communitarianism 
Governance Theories 
its indicators diagnostic tools & Effects 
Collapse/Failure of Governance 
----------------Page (100) Break----------------
     Woodrow Wilson) 
     John Stewart Mill 
     Marx 
     Theories of Bureaucracy (Max Weber 
Theories of Bureaucracy (Max Weber, Marx, John Stewart Mill, Woodrow Wilson) 
     Negative Connotations Associated with the term) 
     Steel Frame of the State 
     Neutrality 
     Introduction to the Concept of Bureaucracy(History 
Associated with the term) 
Introduction to the Concept of Bureaucracy(History, Neutrality, Steel Frame of the State, Negative Connotations 
Bureaucracy 
National Strategies against Corruption and remedial measures 
     Private vs. Public Accountability 
     Professional Accountability 
     Administrative Accountability 
     Legal/ Judicial Accountability 
     Types of Accountability- Political Accountability 
Professional Accountability, Private vs. Public Accountability 
Types of Accountability- Political Accountability, Legal/ Judicial Accountability, Administrative Accountability, 
     a Review of Contemporary Studies) 
     regional and country-wide comparisons 
     Symbolism 
     General Introduction to Accountability and its concepts(Standards 
comparisons, a Review of Contemporary Studies) 
General Introduction to Accountability and its concepts(Standards, Symbolism, regional and country-wide 
Accountability 
     Education) 
     Health 
     Public Policy and Implementation in Key Sectors (i.e 
Public Policy and Implementation in Key Sectors (i.e., Health, Education) 
----------------Page (101) Break----------------
     Supreme Court 
Supreme Court, High Courts, Lower Courts 
Judiciary 
     Provisional Assemblies 
     Senate 
     National Assembly 
National Assembly, Senate, Provisional Assemblies 
Legislature 
Multi-level Governance in Pakistan 
     Program Evaluation- Success and failure of Govt 
     Assessing The Impact of Public Policy 
Assessing The Impact of Public Policy, Program Evaluation- Success and failure of Govt 
Policy Evaluation 
     openness) 
     secrecy 
     Lack of coordination among departments 
     The Quest for Solutions (Lack of research in policy analysis 
     Policy Analysis 
secrecy, openness) 
Policy Analysis, The Quest for Solutions (Lack of research in policy analysis, Lack of coordination among departments, 
     Ability to say “No.”) 
     Political interference 
     Lack of resources 
     Culture of postponement and delays 
     Lack of Decision Making 
     Pervasive Inertia and how to break it 
     Policy Implementation & Role of Bureaucracy (Training 
Making, Culture of postponement and delays, Lack of resources, Political interference, Ability to say “No.”) 
Policy Implementation & Role of Bureaucracy (Training, Pervasive Inertia and how to break it, Lack of Decision 
How Policies are Made (Six including diagnosis and six stages with cautions to be exercise at each stage) 
The Policy Making Process 
Public Policy Formulation and Implementation 
Section 3 
other countries) 
Public Administration and Code of Ethics (Effectiveness of the Estacode and the Code of Ethics, Comparison with 
salaries with the CPI or lack thereof.) 
allegiance, power, corrupting the incumbent, institutional degradation, constitutional guarantees, indexing of 
Role of Bureaucracy in Pakistan (British legacy, civil-military relations, neutrality, dilution of neutrality, political 
----------------Page (102) Break----------------
                                                        
Sunnah and Fiqh 
Concept of Governance and its application in light of Quran 
Quranic Guidance on Good Governance 
Good Governance in Islam 
Role of Citizens in Governance 
Section 4 
Decentralization Model of Kerala 
Principle of Subsidiarity in Public Service Delivery 
Constituents participation in Federal Structure 
Federalism, Devolution and Decentralization 
     Performance & Causes of Success or Failure 
     Its Efficacy 
     Union Administration 
     Tehsil Government 
     Zila Government 
     District Government 
of Success or Failure 
District Government, Zila Government, Tehsil Government, Union Administration, Its Efficacy, Performance & Causes 
Local Government system 
     Provincial Secretariat 
     Federal Secretariat 
     Cabinet Committees 
     Federal Cabinet 
     Office of Chief Minister 
Office of Chief Minister, Federal Cabinet, Cabinet Committees, Federal Secretariat, Provincial Secretariat 
     Office of Governor 
Office of Governor, 
Prime Minister of Pakistan 
     President of Pakistan 
President of Pakistan, 
Functioning of the offices: 
     Lower Courts 
     High Courts 
----------------Page (103) Break----------------
     Lucknow pact 
     Simla Deputation 
     Partition of Bengal 
     All India Muslim League 
     Syed Ahmad Shaheed and Sir Syed Ahmed Khan towards regeneration of the Muslim of South Asia  
     Role of Shah Wali Ullah 
South Asia, All India Muslim League, Partition of Bengal, Simla Deputation, Lucknow pact 
Role of Shah Wali Ullah, Syed Ahmad Shaheed and Sir Syed Ahmed Khan towards regeneration of the Muslim of 
Muslim Struggle for Independence 
Indian Congress 
Parties 
Constitutional and Political Reforms of the British Government (1858-1947) and growth of the Political 
Section 2 
     effects 
     War of Independence in 1857:Causes 
     effects of downfall of the Mughal Empire in India 
     Causes 
     growth of the East India Company 
     origin 
     British Imperialism 
Mughal Empire in India, War of Independence in 1857:Causes and effects 
1857-1947: British Imperialism, origin and growth of the East India Company, Causes and effects of downfall of the 
British Rule in India 
Industry, trade and commerce under the Muslim patronage, Financial Administration 
under Muslim Rules. Sultans, Kings, Economic, Social, Judicial, Civil and Military system during the Muslim rule, 
and the Mughals. The Spirit and legacy of Muslim civilization, Art, Architecture and literature, Public Administration 
Political History Arrival, foundation and consolidation of Muslim rule in India, important rulers of the Slave Dynasty 
Muslim Rule and Heritage in India (712-1857) 
Section 1 
History Of Pakistan & India —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (104) Break----------------
     Pressure Groups in the history of Pakistan 
     Role of Major Political Parties 
     Restoration of Democracy (2008 to date) 
     1988-1999 
Pressure Groups in the history of Pakistan 
,Revival of Democracy: 1988-1999, Restoration of Democracy (2008 to date), Role of Major Political Parties and 
Liaquat Ali Khan to Firoz Khan Noon (1947- 1958), Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto’s Period,(1971-1977),Benazir, Nawaz Sharif 
Working of Democracy in Pakistan 
Section 5 
     Causes and Effects 
Causes and Effects, 
Separation of East Pakistan 
     Civil Military Relationship in Pakistan 
     Zia–ul–Haq and Pervaiz Musharaf regimes 
     Yahya 
     Ayub Khan 
Ayub Khan, Yahya, Zia–ul–Haq and Pervaiz Musharaf regimes, Civil Military Relationship in Pakistan,  
Military in Politics 
Section 4 
Pakistan’s early Challenges— Quaid-i-Azam as Governor-General, various attempts at constitution making 
History of Pakistan (1947- Todate) 
     etc 
     Chaudhry Rahmat Ali 
     Ali Brothes. Sir Agha Khan 
     Syed Amir Ali 
     Mohsin-ul-Mulk 
     Quaid-i-Azam 
Azam, Mohsin-ul-Mulk, Syed Amir Ali, Ali Brothes. Sir Agha Khan, Chaudhry Rahmat Ali, etc 
Lahore Resolution 1940, various Missions and Plans for the partition of the South Asia. Founders of Pakistan: Quaid-i-
Allama Iqal’s Allahabad Address 1930, and Round Table Conference. The Congress Rule in the provinces-1937-1939, 
Pakistan Movement 
Section 3 
Khilafat movement. Nahru Report Quaid-i- Azam’s Fourteen Points 
----------------Page (105) Break----------------
                                                        
Foreign Policy of Pakistan (1947-1999) 
----------------Page (106) Break----------------
History Of Usa —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (107) Break----------------
Progressive Era 
Global perceptions of the USA. 
The Role of Pakistan and USA (2001 - 2012) 
The War on Terror 
An Overview 
International Concerns of USA 
American Role in Cold War and its emergence as the Sole Super Power (1945 - 1990). 
Section 3 
American Role in patronizing UNO and International Organizations 1945 - 2012 
Post 1945 world scenario and emergence of USA and USSR as the Two World Powers. 
1918 & 1939 - 1945) 
USA’s role in the Two World Wars (1914 
Industrialization and its emergence as one of the world powers (1870 -1916) 
Civil War between the North and the East (1850 - 1869) 
Section 2 
Salient Features 
Constitution of the USA 
From 13 to 50 States (1820 - 1949) 
Expansion of USA 
USA as an Independent Country (1783 - 1819) 
USA as a British Colony (1606-1783). 
Advent of the Europeans to British supremacy (1492-1606) 
From ancient times to 1492 
Introduction 
Section 1 
----------------Page (108) Break----------------
                                                        
Check and Balances 
Separation of Powers 
Section 5 
Role and Functions 
The US Congress 
US Presidential Election 
United States’ role in International Conflicts 
Civil Rights Movement 
The Great Depression and the New Deal 
Section 4 
     Reforms of Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson 
Reforms of Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, 
----------------Page (109) Break----------------
     The International Court of Justice 
     Arbitration 
     Conciliation 
     Settlement by the United Nations 
     Inquiry 
     Mediation and Good Offices 
     Negotiation 
International Court of Justice 
Negotiation, Mediation and Good Offices, Inquiry, Settlement by the United Nations, Conciliation, Arbitration, The 
The Settlement of International Disputes. 
Section 2 
The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 
The Law and Practice as to Treaties 
Government in International Law, Recognition of State and Government in National Law 
Personality and Statehood in International Law, The Subjects of International Law, Recognition of State and 
State in General and Recognition 
     International Soft Law 
     Subsidiary Sources of International Law 
     Primary Sources of International Law 
     Article 38 of the Statute of International Court of Justice 
International Law, International Soft Law 
Article 38 of the Statute of International Court of Justice, Primary Sources of International Law, Subsidiary Sources of 
Relation between International Law and State Law. 
International law, The Future of International law and Material Sources of International Law 
International Law, The Effectiveness of International Law, The Weakness of International Law, The Juridical Basis of 
The Emergence of International Law, Early European Authors, The Nation-State System, The Enforcement of 
Nature, Origin and Basis of International Law. 
Section 1 
International Law —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (110) Break----------------
                                                        
Neutrality. 
Section 5 
War, Armed Conflicts and other Hostilities. 
Diplomatic Envoys, Counsels and other Representatives. 
The State and the Economic Interest. 
The State and the Individual. 
Section 4 
Succession to Rights and Obligations. 
State Jurisdiction. 
State Responsibility. 
State Territorial Sovereignty. 
Section 3 
International Institutions 
     The Right of Self-Defence 
     The Collective Use of Force 
     The Law after the Charter 
     The Law before the UN Charter 
The Law before the UN Charter, The Law after the Charter, The Collective Use of Force, The Right of Self-Defence 
The Use of Force 
War, Limits on the Choice of Methods and Means of Warfare 
Persons’, Protection of Wounded, Sick and Ship-Wrecked Persons, POWs, Civilians, Limitations on the Conduct of 
International and Non-International Armed Conflicts, Non-International Armed Conflict, ‘Combatant’ and ‘Protected 
International Humanitarian Law. 
----------------Page (111) Break----------------
     Decision Making and Analysis   
     Determinants  
Determinants, Decision Making and Analysis   
Foreign Policy  
Balance of Power  
Power. Elements of Na tional Power  
Conceptualization of security in the Twenty  -First century  
International Political Security.   
     Constructivism  
     Feminism  
     Critical Theory  
     Post-modernism  
Post-modernism, Critical Theory, Feminism, Constructivism    
     Neo-liberalism  
     Neo-realism  
Neo-realism, Neo-liberalism 
     System Approach 
     The Scientific Revolution-Behavioral Approach 
The Scientific Revolution-Behavioral Approach, System Approach, 
The Classical Approaches-Realism and Idealism 
Theories and Approaches 
Evolution of International Society 
The Nation-State System 
The Definition and Scope of International Relations 
Introduction 
Paper— 1 (Marks-100) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
International Relations —  200 Marks 
----------------Page (112) Break----------------
     Dependence and Interdependence discourse 
     Theories of Imperialism 
Theories of Imperialism, Dependence and Interdependence discourse 
     and Neo- Marxism 
     Economic Liberalism 
     Mercantilism 
Mercantilism, Economic Liberalism, and Neo- Marxism 
Theories in IPE 
International Political Economy. 
Theory and practice with special reference to India and Pakistan 
Deterrence 
Determinants of Pakistani Strategic Culture 
Strategic Culture 
     Guerilla Warfare 
     Civil War 
     Asymmetric Warfare 
     Limited War 
     Total War 
     Causation of War 
Causation of War, Total War, Limited War, Asymmetric Warfare, Civil War, Guerilla Warfare 
War 
Strategic Approach to International Relation. 
Section 2 
National Interest 
Sovereignty 
----------------Page (113) Break----------------
     Revival of Cold War 
     Détente and Loose Bipolarity 
     Era of Tight Bipolarity 
Era of Tight Bipolarity, Détente and Loose Bipolarity, Revival of Cold War 
     Rise of United States and Soviet Union 
Rise of United States and Soviet Union, 
Decolonization in Asia and Africa 
Cold War 
     Second World War 
     League of Nations 
     Fascism 
     Russian Revolution 
Russian Revolution, Fascism, League of Nations, Second World War 
International Relation between two Wars 
International Court of Justice Paper- II (Marks-100) 
World Bank 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
United Nations 
International Political Institution 
Section 3 
Arms Control /Disarmament and Nuclear Non proliferation Regime 
International Law 
Diplomacy 
Approaches to Peace 
Globalization 
Internationalism 
Nationalism 
International political community. 
----------------Page (114) Break----------------
     Visa and People to people contact 
     Sir Creek & Siachen border 
Sir Creek & Siachen border, Visa and People to people contact 
Composite Dialogue 
     Indus Water Treaty 
     accords 
     Overview of agreements 
India and Pakistan: Overview of agreements and accords, Indus Water Treaty 
Pakistan 
Analytical overview of peace processes between/among the states of South Asia especially between India and 
Peace-making and Peace-Building in South Asia 
South Asia 
     Pakistan and EU 
     India 
     China 
     Russia 
     USA 
USA, Russia, China, UK, India, Pakistan and EU 
Foreign Policy of Selected Countries 
     World Bank and the IMF 
     Reforms in the United Nations 
Reforms in the United Nations, World Bank and the IMF 
League of Nations, United Nations, Regional Organizations, EU, ASEAN, NAFTA, SAARC, SCO, OIC, ECO, WTO 
International and Regional Organizations 
Section 4 
     Unipolarity (New World Order) and Revival of Multi-Polarity 
     Globalization 
     Terrorism 
     Clash of Civilizations 
     End of History 
Polarity 
End of History, Clash of Civilizations, Terrorism, Globalization, Unipolarity (New World Order) and Revival of Multi-
Post Cold War 
----------------Page (115) Break----------------
     Cooperation for Nuclear Energy 
     Challenges of Non-Proliferation 
Challenges of Non-Proliferation, Cooperation for Nuclear Energy 
Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty 
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty 
Partial Test Ban Treaty 
Nuclear Supplier Group 
     Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty 
     International Atomic Energy Agency 
Nuclear Non –Proliferation Regime: International Atomic Energy Agency, Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty 
Indian-Pakistan Nuclear Doctrines 
Nuclear Weapon States- Programs and Postures 
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Weapons of Mass Destruction 
The Bonn Process- Withdrawal 
Operation Enduring Freedom 
     AL-Qeada & 9/11 
     Post Cold War situation---Rise of Taliban  
Post Cold War situation---Rise of Taliban, AL-Qeada & 9/11 
Geneva Accord 
Soviet Invasion and Mujahedeen 
Afghanistan: Cold war theatre 
and Role of civil society 
Trade 
----------------Page (116) Break----------------
                                                        
Palestine Issue 
Kashmir Issue 
Euro-Atlantic Vs. Asia Pacific: Great Power Policies 
Contemporary Issues 
Section 5 
Militarization and Weaponization of Space 
The Missile Defence Systems and their impact on global strategic environment 
----------------Page (117) Break----------------
     Major points of his mission  
     Prophet Muhammad  (PBUH) as a Motivator (Daa’i) 
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) as a Motivator (Daa’i), Major points of his mission 
A Chronology of the Major Events in his Life  
Biography of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH)  
The Prophetic Age (570 -632) 
The Dawn of Islam  
     Religious and Economic Conditions in the Near East including Ar  abia before the dawn of Islam  
     Cultural 
     Social 
     Political 
Islam 
Political, Social, Cultural, Religious and Economic Conditions in the Near East including Arabia before the dawn of 
An Overview 
Pre-Islamic Near East  
Part –I (Marks 50) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Islamic History & Culture —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (118) Break----------------
Propagation of Islam 
Educational System 
Defense in Early Islam 
Administration and State Conduct 
Development of Law and Judiciary in Early Islam 
The Early Phase (622-660) 
Institutional Development of the Muslim Civilization 
Shura or the Consultative Body and its Role 
Appointment of Caliph 
Caliphate or Vicegerency of Man 
Sovereignty of God 
Functions of the Islamic State 
Form of the Government 
Nature of Islamic State 
Political System of Islam under the Prophet (PBUH) and the Pious Caliphate 
Abdication of Imam Hasan and Establishment of Umayyad Dynasty (660) 
Caliph Ali b.Talib (656-660): Rise of Factionalism 
Problems and Issues in the Muslim Community 
Caliph Uthman b.Affan (644-56) 
Establishment of Administrative System and Expansion of Muslim Empire 
Caliph Umar b.Khattab (634-44) 
Apostasy Wars and Consolidation of Islam 
Caliph Abu Bakr (632-34) 
The Pious Caliphate (632-660) 
Section 2 
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) as a Political Leader/Head of the State 
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) as a Military Leader/Strategist 
----------------Page (119) Break----------------
     State 
State, Society and Economy under the Ottomans 
Rise and Fall of the Ottoman Turks (1299-1923) 
The Ottoman Empire 
Impact of the Crusades on Muslim-Christian Relations 
Major Encounters and Actors (1092-1228) 
The Crusades against Islam 
Section 4 
     Arts and Architecture 
     Muslim Contribution in the Realm of Culture 
Muslim Contribution in the Realm of Culture, Arts and Architecture 
Political Fragmentation and the Fall of Granada (1492) 
Spain under the rule of the Arabs and Moors (711-1492) 
Spain under the Muslim Rule 
Cultural Achievements 
Muslim Philosophy under the Abbasids 
Development of Scientific Knowledge under the Abbasids 
Administrative Structure under the Abbasids 
The Abbasid Revolution and the Establishment of the Abbasid Dynasty 
The Abbasids of Baghdad (749-1258) 
Cultural Achievements Part –II (Marks 50) 
Society and the Development of Arabic Literature 
Statecraft and Administration under the Umayyads 
Political History of the Umayyad Dynasty 
The Umayyads in Power (660-749) 
Section 3 
Heritage and Culture 
Financial Administration 
----------------Page (120) Break----------------
                                                        
Dissemination of Muslim Learning in the West 
     Social and Educational Aspects of Islamic Modernism 
     Economic 
     Political 
     Intellectual 
Intellectual, Political, Economic, Social and Educational Aspects of Islamic Modernism 
The Emergence of Islamic Modernism 
Islam and Modernity in Contemporary World 
Section 5 
A Critical View of Sufism 
Relationship of the Sufis with the State and Political Authorities 
Contribution of the Sufis to the Muslim Civilization 
Origin and Development of Sufism 
Sufism as an Institution of the Muslim Society 
     Arts and Architecture 
     Contribution towards Culture 
Contribution towards Culture, Arts and Architecture 
Treatment with the Religious Minorities 
     Society and Economy under the Ottomans 
----------------Page (121) Break----------------
     magic bullet theory 
     hypodermic needle 
hypodermic needle, magic bullet theory 
Powerful effects model 
Diffusion of innovations 
Media hegemony 
Media Usage and gratifications 
The Spiral of silence 
Media as agents of power 
Schramm’s four theories and criticism on these theories 
Normative theories of the press 
Mass Communication Theories 
Section 2 
Newcomb’s symmetry theory (1953) o Westley-McLean’s model (1976) o Gerbner model (1956) 
- o Lasswell’s Model (1948) o Shannon-Weaver model (1948) o Osgood,s model (1954) o Schramm’s model (1954) o 
Basic models in Mass Communication 
     Evaluation of a model 
     Functions of a model 
Functions of a model, Evaluation of a model 
     Basic Models 
     Process of Communication 
     Types of Communication 
     Need/Importance/Purposes 
     Concept – Definitions 
Models 
Concept – Definitions, Need/Importance/Purposes, Types of Communication, Process of Communication, Basic 
Introduction to Mass Communication 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Journalism & Mass Communication —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (122) Break----------------
     Media freedom and its role for democracy 
Media freedom and its role for democracy, 
The balance between interrelation and interdependence 
Media as a social system 
Mass media and social change 
Media and Society 
Section 3 
the new social media and its effects on developing world 
International Communication in the Internet Age 
McBride commission and its recommendations 
Imbalance in the flow of information between North and South 
Communication Flow in Global Media 
Communication and Cultural imperialism 
     and the mass media 
     technology 
     Globalization 
Globalization, technology, and the mass media 
The Historical Context of International Communication 
Global / International Communication 
Marshal McLuhan’s media determinism 
Powerful media revisited 
two-step and multi-step flow of communication 
Moderate effects model 
----------------Page (123) Break----------------
     historical 
historical, analytical perspective 
The dominant paradigm of development 
Theories of development support communication with specific focus on the developing world 
Development Support Communication 
Section 4 
The question of freedom and responsibility 
potential for change and the present performance 
The new radio 
     abuses 
     uses 
The new 24/7 television: uses and abuses 
from total dependence to enormous power 
Electronic media 
     from mission to the market 
     The newspaper industry 
The newspaper industry, from mission to the market 
Press in Pakistan 
Government-press relations 
Employer-employee relations in Pakistani media 
The system of journalism and the media system 
     and analytical review 
     chronological 
     historical 
historical, chronological, and analytical review 
Media system in Pakistan 
Mass Media in Pakistan 
Mass media and social representation 
Media as an awareness agent 
four social functions of the media 
The functional approach to mass media 
----------------Page (124) Break----------------
     Defamation and relevant portions of PPC  
     Libel 
Libel, Defamation and relevant portions of PPC 
Development of media regulations from British colonial era to independent Pakistan 
History of Media Laws in Pakistan 
Media Laws and Ethics 
Section 5 
PR Ethics 
     press conference 
     press note 
     press release 
press release, press note, press conference 
Basic methods of PR 
Private PR agencies and their structure 
PR as a tool for governance 
Public relations and publicity 
Press Information Department (PID) 
Ministry of information 
Public relation in Pakistan 
Historical development of public relations: from press agentry to PR 
Concept of Public Relations 
Public Relations 
how to infuse new ideas into a developing population 
Social Marketing 
Glocalization 
Globalization vs Localization 
community development as a snowball effect 
Small is beautiful 
The Alternative paradigm of development 
     analytical perspective 
----------------Page (125) Break----------------
                                                        
The media’s quest for freedom and its inability to self regulate 
Inability of the media to develop a code of ethics as an institution 
Press Code of Ethics 
     and reasons for inactivity 
     present status 
     need 
need, present status, and reasons for inactivity 
Citizens Media Commission 
Press Council of Pakistan (PCP) 
     and operational mechanisms 
     development 
     establishment 
establishment, development, and operational mechanisms 
PEMRA 
     RPPPO 
     PPO 
PPO, RPPPO 
----------------Page (126) Break----------------
                                                        
     1898 
     vi. Criminal Procedure Code 
vi. Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 
     1984 
     v. Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 
v. Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 
     1860 
     iv. Pakistan Penal Code 
iv. Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 
     1908 
     iii. The Code of Civil Procedure 
iii. The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
ii. Establishment of Civil Courts with their Original & Appellate Jurisdiction 
i. Concept of arbitration, arbitration with or without intervention of court and in civil suits 
All Provisions of 
Section 2 
Definitions of Crime 
Section 1 
Law —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (127) Break----------------
     express & implied conditions 
     conditions and warranties 
     Sale & agreement to sell 
Sale & agreement to sell, conditions and warranties, express & implied conditions 
Differences 
Definitions 
Sales of Goods Act, 1930 
     damages for breach of contract 
     consequences of breach 
     Breach of contract 
Breach of contract, consequences of breach, damages for breach of contract 
     contracts that need not to be performed 
     Performance of Contract 
Performance of Contract, contracts that need not to be performed 
     Agency) 
     Indemnity 
     Pledge 
     Bailment 
     Quasi 
     Variety of Contracts (Contingent 
Variety of Contracts (Contingent, Quasi, Bailment, Pledge, Indemnity, Agency) 
     Not Voidable) 
     Voidable 
     Void 
     Kinds of Contracts (Valid 
Kinds of Contracts (Valid, Void, Voidable, Not Voidable) 
     Not hereby declared to be Void) 
     Capacity of Parties 
     Free consent 
     Consideration 
     Acceptance 
     Essentials of a valid contract (Proposal 
declared to be Void) 
Essentials of a valid contract (Proposal, Acceptance, Consideration, Free consent, Capacity of Parties, Not hereby 
Definitions 
Law of Contract, 1872 
Section 1 
Mercantile Law —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (128) Break----------------
     discharge 
     payment & interest  
     presentment 
     Rules (as to negotiation  
acceptance, payment for honour) 
Rules (as to negotiation, presentment, payment & interest, discharge,  noting and protest, compensation, 
     holder & holder in due course  
     Parties to instruments  
Parties to instruments, holder & holder in due course 
     promissory note) 
     bill of exchange 
     Types of negotiable instruments (Cheque  
Types of negotiable instruments (Cheque, bill of exchange, promissory note) 
Definitions 
Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 
     by notice on happening of contingencies) 
     by court 
     by agreement 
     Dissolution of firms (compulsory 
Dissolution of firms (compulsory, by agreement, by court, by notice on happening of contingencies) 
Incoming and outgoing partners (minor) 
Relation of partners to third persons (implied authority of partner, doctrine of holding out) 
Rights and duties of Partners 
     limited partnership) 
     particular partnership 
     Kinds of partnership (partnership at will 
Kinds of partnership (partnership at will, particular partnership, limited partnership) 
Essentials of partnership 
Definitions 
Partnership Act, 1932 
Section 2 
     rights of unpaid seller 
     Right and duties of seller & buyer 
Right and duties of seller & buyer, rights of unpaid seller 
     Nemo dat 
     Caveat emptor 
Doctrines: Caveat emptor, Nemo dat 
----------------Page (129) Break----------------
     time and place of dispatch) 
     acknowledgement 
     Electronic documents (attribution 
Electronic documents (attribution, acknowledgement, time and place of dispatch) 
     attestation etc.) 
     stamp duty 
     signature 
     Recognition and presumption of electronic transactions (writing 
Recognition and presumption of electronic transactions (writing, signature, stamp duty, attestation etc.) 
Definitions 
Electronic Transaction Ordinance, 2002 
Provisions as to penalty and appeals 
Functions and powers of commission 
     term) 
     composition 
     Competition commission of Pakistan (established 
Competition commission of Pakistan (established, composition, term) 
Approval of mergers 
     marketing practices) 
     discipline 
     certain agreements 
     Prohibition and abuse of (dominant position 
Prohibition and abuse of (dominant position, certain agreements, discipline, marketing practices) 
Definitions 
Competition Act, 2010 
Section 3 
Provisions as to foreign instruments 
     duties of banker) 
     Special provisions relating to cheques & bills of exchange (dishonor 
Special provisions relating to cheques & bills of exchange (dishonor, duties of banker) 
Special rules of evidence 
     payment for honour) 
     acceptance 
     compensation 
     noting and protest 
----------------Page (130) Break----------------
     complaints before commission and disposal) 
     powers and functions 
     Consumer Commission (establishment 
Consumer Commission (establishment, powers and functions, complaints before commission and disposal) 
Definitions 
Consumer’s Protection Act, 2006 
Stay of legal proceedings in presence of arbitration agreement 
Types of arbitration (with or without intervention of court) 
     modification and setting aside of award) 
     Powers of court upon award (remittance 
Powers of court upon award (remittance, modification and setting aside of award) 
Award by arbitrator 
     number and removal of arbitrator 
     Appointment 
Appointment, number and removal of arbitrator 
Definitions 
The Arbitration Law in Pakistan 
Section 4 
     damage to information system etc) 
     false certificates 
     Offences & Nature (false information 
Offences & Nature (false information, false certificates, damage to information system etc) 
Application to acts done outside Pakistan 
Certification of service providers 
----------------Page (131) Break----------------
     issuing and prohibition of instruments) 
     Payment instruments (designation 
Payment instruments (designation, issuing and prohibition of instruments) 
system, governance & operation arrangement) 
Payment system and their operation (designation of payment system & revocation, real time gross settlement 
Definitions 
Electronic Fund Transfer Act, 2007 
     by court) 
     Winding up (voluntary 
Winding up (voluntary, by court) 
     annual general meeting) 
     general 
     Meeting’s and proceedings (statutory 
Meeting’s and proceedings (statutory, general, annual general meeting) 
     auditors) 
     chief executive 
     directors 
     share holders 
     Management and administration (promoters 
Management and administration (promoters, share holders, directors, chief executive, auditors) 
Transfer of shares and debentures 
     prospectus) 
     articles of association 
     Fundamental papers of company (Memorandum of association 
Fundamental papers of company (Memorandum of association, articles of association, prospectus) 
Types of Companies 
Definitions 
Companies Ordinance, 1984 
Section 5 
Contract between consumer and provider 
Offences and penalties 
Duties and liabilities of provider of goods (return and refund of goods) 
Provisions as to compulsory recall of goods 
----------------Page (132) Break----------------
                                                        
Law relating to action before court 
Notification of error and liabilities of parties 
Documentation of transfers 
Supervisory Control of state bank 
Clearing and other obligations 
----------------Page (133) Break----------------
Muslim Law & Jurisprudence —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (134) Break----------------
Islamic Banking and Insurance 
Islamic Law of Contract 
Section 3 
Succession 
Child Custody 
Post-Divorce Maintenance 
Judicial Separation (Faskh) 
Separation by Mutual Agreement (Khula) 
Separation by Repudiation (Talaq) 
Divorce 
Dower 
Marriage 
Islamic Family Law 
Qisas and Diyat 
Taz’ir 
Hadd 
Islamic Criminal Law 
Section 2 
Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence 
Ijtehad 
Qiyas 
Ijma 
The Sunnah 
The Quran 
The Sources of Islamic Law 
Section 1 
----------------Page (135) Break----------------
                                                        
Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 
Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 
Section 5 
Islamic Law and Human Rights 
Islamic International Law 
Section 4 
----------------Page (136) Break----------------
                                                        
Pashto Folk Literature, (i). Tappa’ (ii) Charbaita’ (iii) Neemakai’ (iv) Badala etc and Pashto proverbs, 
Rahim Majzoob (v) Younas Khalil 
Pashto Modern Poetry (i) Amir Hamza Khan Shinwari (ii) Ghani Khan (iii) Qalandar Momand (iv) Abdur 
Section 5 
(v) kazim Khan Sheda 
Pashto Classic Poetry (i) Khoshal Khan Khattak (ii) Rehman Baba (iii) Abdul Hamid Baba (iv) Ali Khan 
General Questions on evolution and criticism of Pashto Prose and Poetry. 
Section 4 
Translation of unseen passages of English or Urdu into Pashto. 
Translation of unseen passages from Pashto in to English or Urdu. 
Section 3 
Essay on prominent aspects of Pashto Culture, Historical and Literary personalities. 
General question on history of Pashto literature and literary movements in Pashto 
Section 2 
Pashto Grammar 
Origin of Pashto language, its dialects and alphabets 
Section 1 
Pashto —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (137) Break----------------
     Hindi and Revivalist may be studied 
     Iraqi 
     the four styles known as Khurasani 
     ھلمج ھبش  /تصو ، فحر ،دیق ، تفص ، ریمض ، لعف ، In classical background سما 
Iraqi, Hindi and Revivalist may be studied  
ھلمج ھبش  /ت صو ، ف حر ،دیق ، ت فص ، ریمض ، لعف ، In classical background, the four styles known as Khurasani,   سما
Significant features of the grammar of the language as under 
Section 4 
Indo-Pakistan Subcontinent. 
A Short introduction to Persian Language and Literature, besides Iran, in Afghanistan, Tajikistan and 
writing and their outstanding representatives. 
The contemporary Persian Literature with special emphasis on the New Poetry (ون رعش) and Fiction 
Section 3 
prose writers and poets from 4th century H to 10th century H). 
Movement with special emphasis on the outstanding Persian prose writers and poets. (The Persian 
The advent and history of Classical Persian Literature from SAMANID’s period to the Mushrootah 
movement and the adaptation of foreign loan words need to be studied). 
Origin and development of the new Persian Language (In this part Revivalist movement, Purist 
Section 2 
     Old Persian and Pahlavi 
     Avesta 
Avesta, Old Persian and Pahlavi 
Elementary Information about the Pre Islamic Persian Languages 
PART— I (Marks-50) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Persian —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (138) Break----------------
PROSE 
the candidate’s critical abilities. TEXT SELECTION 
II (Marks-50) This part will require first hand reading of the texts prescribed and questions will be designed to test 
Translation of simple English passage into Persian. PART 
Section 5 
A Short essay writing in Persian on literary and cultural themes. 
----------------Page (139) Break----------------
نفلاطوا ....ینانوی  : ت یاکحدر رعش ت قیقح و حصلاا ت بیااد سلامیھا . : مجع ربوز    نم ۂدنب مدازا قشع ست ا مماا نم امش ن   زمسو ہلال غ
ٓ
رعاش منا ب کتا منا : دیخو ارسرا یمثنو رشما 6 لقباا ھملاع    ارسرا دیخو ھلحرم ات مسو ت باین لھیا ھب یستثناا  : ت یاکحدر ینعم ینکھا 
ب یج موھ  نپنھا  دہکر یما    ھک ایب ۀقاعد نسماآ نیمدابگر 124 Revised Scheme and Syllabus for CSS Competitive Examination 
:یرز یاھ علطم اب تغزلیا) ب لاغ 5    ھب ییواد ھک در آن رضخ را  ھتفخ  اص ع  ست ا    نناآ ھک صل و ریا میھ آرزو دننک    ۀجلو  ھب ینعم
یم میوگ و از ۀتفگ دخو دملشاد    اھلاس دل ب لط مجا مج از یم ام دکر    ای ربخ یب ش بکو ربخ ب حاص ھک یشو  یلودھ ب لاغ انیود
(یرز یاھ علطم اب ت غزلیا) ظ فاح انیود ظ فاح 4    رصق ھک ایب ملا ت سس ت خس دبنیا ست ا    سیدر دہمژ ھک میاا مغ داھنخو دنام    ش فا 
یاھخو مدآ    ایب رہنظا  نک   دل ھک ریا یم یدآ    ای  ،یمن نمدا ھچ لمنز دبو نم ھک یئاج ب ش دمبو    ای ۀچھر ییباز وت شک ر نبتا آزری 
انیوا نم و وت (یرز یاھ علطم اب ت غزلیا) ت غزلیا انیود 3 وخسر میرا    لمد زو  ث یدح  ب ش  زنا ت فگ یم    مخبر هشد رس ب شم اک ت س ریا 
ام را       ی بنما  رخ  ہک  غبا و مناتسلگ وزرا ت س دشاب روان نم ت     ہب روز گ مر وب ات وچ      ات ایب رقد رگیدکی نیمابد    ک نخ نا دم ہک مینیشن در 
ٓ                            ٓ
دنکر رب یسوم ت مناجا نچوپا )فترد دوم(    ف ختلاا دنکر در یگنوگچ و لیپ لکش )فترد مسو( : س مش انیود    یدوبر ای نافیرح ای دیشکب  ر 
: یمعنو 2 میرو انلاوم    ھمان ین    نستادا رمع اب یگنچ ریپ ضی ر ﷲ ا )فترد اول(    نیدرخا ستاییرو  ھب  یکیرتا ریش را  ) فترد  دوم(       رنکاا 
 
(ہفسانا) 6 حمدا  لا لجلا 2-POETRY رعاش منا ب کتا منا : نامھھشا رشما 1 سیدوفر    در ش یاتس دخر    در ش یاتس یگسترداد  یمثنو
ٓ
Syllabus for CSS Competitive Examination  ف نصم منا ب تاک منا  : ادلفوا یدافو رشمادلج  ،متشہ س لجمدوم 5 یسجز نسح  رتا ہس
،ت سیب و دوم ،مشش ت یاکح مسو ت یاکح – فتمھ ب با  رمچھا ت یاکح – مشش ب با  دوم  ت یاکح  –  رمچھا 123 Revised Scheme and 
،مشش    ،ت سیب ودوم 4مزدھنو ،مردھچھا ،فتمھ ،  ،لھچ و مکی  ،متسیب فتمھ ت یاکح – دوم ب با  مزدھنو ، مدھشانز ت یاکح – مسو ب با
 :مشش لصف ھمان ت سایسرندا نقاضیا و نخطیبا و ب ستحم ........ یسوط لملکا منظا 3 : نگلستا  ،ت یاکح  اول اول ب با ازیشیر یسعد
 - رشمایکیمیا دتسعا  :در عیتر شتندا و لایتو نندرا 1 لیامحمدغز مماا  : ب لمحجوا ف شکب با ف لتصوا 2 یہجویر نعثما نب یلع 
نییعت ت ھج حمطر ت لااسو ھب و هنداخو قتد  ھ ب  را هشد ص خشم .نددھ خساپ نایشاھ ناییاتو .1 ب نتخاا نمتو:رثن ف نصم منا ب کتا منا 
.نگیھفر  -9ھمجرت افگراپیر نگلیسیا دہسا ھب نباز .سیرفا (50 هنمر) دوم ش خب  نمتو ات دشو یم ست اخودر نطلبا داو از ش خب ینا در
 :نھاآسانیاخر   و ت ضھن گشت زبا ھعلاطم دیاب .دشویندھ،قیاعر،  -8رش نگا  ینشاا  هکوتا  ھب  نباز سیرفا رۀبادر  ت بیااد سیرفا و ت موضوعا 
رستود  نباز سیرفا دننام  :سما  ،لعف  ،ریمض  ،ت فص  ،دیق  ، /ھلمج ھبشف حر ،ت صو.  -7ک بس یاھ بیاد گانھرچھا و مینھز یاھ دیجاا 
ھتسجرب .نھاآ  -5یفرعم هکوتا نباز و ت بیااد سیرفا   ،ھب  وہعلا در ،انیرا  نتاجیکستا  ،نفغانستاا  و  ھبش  رہقا نپاکستا و .ندھ    -6اعنوا  مھم 
).ننویسندگا و انشاعر از نقر رمچھا  یجرھ ات نقر مدھ یجرھ(  -4ت بیااد رصاعم سیرفا ون رعش رب تآدیک اب و نستادا یسیون و ننمایندگا 
(دوش  -3رظھو و یخرتا ت بیااد ک یسلاک سیرفا از دورۀ نسامانیا ات ب نقلاا طھ ومشر تآدیک اب هیژو رب ننویسندگا و انشاعر  سیرفا ھتسجرب
2ءمنشا و لماکت سیرفا رصاعم) در ینا ش بنج ت مسق گشت زبا  ،ت ضھن هسر یسیون و س قتباا و ذتخاا وام واژہ یاھ  ھعلاطم دیاب جیرخابیاد
(100 هنمر) (50 هنمر) اول ش خب نموآز ۀگرب سیرفا -1ت طلاعاا دیبنیا رۀبادر  یبانھاز  ش یپ  از  :مسلااستاییاو  نباستا و یپھلو  -سیرفا ،
ینکدک 10 ******* 122 Revised Scheme and Syllabus for CSS Competitive Examination PAPER: PERSIAN (100 MARKS) 
(مظن)  ناھپیر ک ی خسر ہَ فوکش ولماش دحما 8 ( مظن)   زدسو یم ہباغچ ایبر لمد  9 زاد خفر   وغفر (مظن) یھکو یوھا دوم ہ َ ارزھ  یعیفش
ٔ                               ٓ  ٔ
او را  ت س ین  یلحاس      لحقاناا زج ممقا ت سین ایربک    یناملسم ہک نددا مزر یند را      رقلند  لیم  ی تقریر  اردند (مظن) مھاآد ای جیشوی امین 7  ات
 
 
نچو  غاچر ہلال زمسو  در  نخیابا امش    ای  ہغنچ بیدہاخو س گرن وچ اننگر زیخ : زحجا نمغارا     ز ج مملاغ یضار میوجن وت    در نا در ای ہک 
ٔ                              ٓ
:در ینعم ینکھا نفلاطوا ....ینانوی  : ت یاکحدر رعش ت قیقح و حصلاا ت بیااد سلامیھا . : مجع ربوز    دنب نم ٔہ مدازا قشع ست ا مماا نم  
ٓ
Examination رعاش منا ب کتا منا : دیخو ارسرا یمثنو رشما 6 لقباا ھملاع    ارسرا دیخو ھلحرم ات مسو ت باین لھیا ھب یستثناا   ت یاکح
ھب ب یج موھ  نپنھا  دہکر یما    ھک ایب ۀقاعد نسماآ نیمدابگر 121 Revised Scheme and Syllabus for CSS Competitive 
:یرز یاھ علطم اب ت غزلیا) یلودھ ب لاغ 5    ھب ییواد ھک در آن رضخ را  ھ تفخ  اص ع  ست ا    نناآ ھک صل و ریا میھ وآرز  دننک    ۀجلو  ینعم
دنام    ش فا میوگ یم و از ۀتفگ دخو دملشاد    اھلاس دل ب لط مجا مج از یم ام دکر    ای ربخ یب ش بکو ربخ ب حاص ھک یشو  ب لاغ انیود
نبتا آزری (یرز یاھ علطم اب ت غزلیا) ظ فاح انیود ظ فاح 4    رصق ھک ایب ملا ت سس ت خس دبنیا ست ا    سیدر دہمژ ھک میاا داھوخن مغ 
ب شم رس ریا یاھخو مدآ    ایب رہنظا  نک   دل ھک ریا یم یدآ    ای  ،یمن نمدا ھچ لمنز دبو نم ھک یئاج ب ش دمبو    ای ۀچھر ییباز وت شک ر 
مینیشن در انیوا نم و وت (یرز یاھ علطم اب ت غزلیا) ت غزلیا انیود 3 وخسر میرا    لمد زو  ث یدح  ب ش  زنا ت فگ یم    مخبر هشد  اک ت س
دیشکب ای  ر ام را      ی بنما  رخ  ہک  غبا و مناتسلگ وزرا ت س دشاب روان نم ت     ہب روز گ مر وب ات وچ      ات ایب رقد رگیدکی نیمابد    ک نخ نا دم ہک 
ٓ                            ٓ
رنکاا  دنکر رب یسوم تمناجا نچوپا )فترد دوم(    ف ختلاا دنکر در یگنوگچ و لیپ لکش )فترد مسو( : س مش انیود    یدوبر ای نحریفا 
: یمعنو یمثنو 2 میرو انلاوم    ھمان ین    نستادا رمع اب یگنچ ریپ ضی ر ﷲ ا )فترد اول(    نیدرخا ستاییرو  ھب  یکیرتا ریش را  ) فترد  دوم(    
 
5 (ہفسانا) رتا ہس 6 حمدا  لاَ لجلا 2-POETRY رعاش منا ب کتا منا : نامھھشا رشما 1 سیدوفر    در ش یاتس دخر    در ش یاتس یگسترداد 
 
،مشش ت یاکح مسو ت یاکح – فتمھ ب با  رمچھا ت یاکح – مشش ب با  دوم  ت یاکح  –  رمچھا  : ادلفوا یدافودلج  ،متشہ س لجمدوم  یسجز نسح
and Syllabus for CSS Competitive Examination ف نصم منا ب کتا منا ،ت سیب و دوم  ب با مزدھنو ، مدھشانز ت یاکح – مسو ب با رشما
مشش  ،فتمھ ،مردھچھا  ،مزدھنو  ،ودوماول ت یاکح ،، مکی و لھچ  4 اول ب با، متسیب ، 120 فتمھ ت یاکح – دوم ب با Revised Scheme 
ب ستحم و نخطیبا و نقاضیا رندا ........  2 یہجویر نعثما:مشش لصف ھمان ت سایس یسوط لملکا منظا 3 :  ت سیب  ازیشیر یسعد نگلستا
ف نصم منا ب کتا منا  نب یلع ب لمحجوا ف شک: ف لتصوا ب با  1 لیامحمدغز مماا -دتسعا یکیمیا : نندرا لایتو و شتندا عیتر در  رشما
----------------Page (140) Break----------------
                                                        
ٔ
7 (مظن)  ناھپیر ک ی خرس  ہشکوف ات ولماش حمدا 8 (مظن) زدسو یم ہباغچ ایبر لمد 9 زاد خفر وغفر (مظن) یھکو یوھ ا دوم ہ ٓٔ ارزھ ینکدک یعیفش 10  
در ن ا در ای ہک او را تسین یلحاس     لحقاناا زج ممقا تسین ایربک     یناملسم ہک نددا مزر یند را     رقلند لیم یتقریر اردند (مظن) مھاآد ای جیشوی امین 
ٔ
ستا مماا نم امش ن       ٓ  ابایخ در زمسو ہلال غنچو اچر       ای  ہغنچ سگرن وچ ہدیباخو اننگر زیخ : زحجا نمغاار      ز ج مملاغ یضار میوجن وت  
تباین لھیا ھب یستثناا  : تیاکحدر ینعم ینکھا نفلاطوا ....ینانوی  : تیاکحدر رعش تقیقح و حصلاا تبیااد سلامیھا . : مجع ربوز     نم ۂدنب مداز ا قشع 
     Syllabus for CSS Competitive Examination رعاش منا بکتا منا : دیخو ارسرا یمثنو رشما 6 لقباا ھملاع     ارسرا دیخو ھلحرم ات مسو 
آرزو دننک     ۀجلو بیج ھب ینعم موھ نپنھا دہکر یما     ھک ایب ۀقاعد نسماآ نیمدابگر 124 Revised Scheme 
ھک بحاص ربخ یشو :یرز یاھ علطم اب تغزلیا) یلودھ بلاغ انیود بلاغ 5     ھب ییواد ھک در آن رضخ را ھتفخ اصع ستا     نناآ ھک صلو ریا میھ 
تسس دبنیا ستا     دیسر دہمژ ھک میاا مغ داھنخو دنام     شفا میوگ یم و از ۀتفگ دخو دملشاد     اھلاس دل بلط مجا مج از یم ام دکر     ای ربخ یب شبکو 
نمدا ھچ لمنز دبو نم ھک یئاج بش دمبو     ای ۀچھر ییباز وت شکر نبتا آزری (یرز یاھ علطم اب تغزلیا) ظفاح انیود ظفاح 4     رصق ھک ایب ملا  تخس
(یرز یاھ 3 وخسر میرا     لمد زو ثیدح بش زنا تفگ یم     مخبر ہشد رس بشم اک تس ریا یاھخو مدآ     ایب رہنظا نک  دل ھک ریا یم یدآ     ای ،یمن 
تس دشاب روان نم ت     ہب روز گمر وب ات وچ       ات ایب رقد رگیدکی نیمابد     ک نخ ن ا دم ہک مینیشن در انیوا نم و وت  علطم اب تغزلیا) تغزلیا انیود
)فترد دوم(     فختلاا دنکر در یگنوگچ و لیپ لکش )فترد مسو( : سمش انیود     یدوبر ای نحریفا ای دیشکب  ر ام را     یبنما رخ ہک غبا و مناتسلگ وزر ا 
    ھمان ین     نستادا رمع اب یگنچ ریپ ضیر ﷲا )فترد اول(     نیدرخا ستاییرو ھب یکیرتا ریش را )فترد دوم(     رنکاا دنکر رب یسوم تمناجا نچوپا 
6 حمدا  ل  ا لجلا 2-POETRY رعاش منا بکتا منا : نامھھشا رشما 1 سیدوفر     در شیاتس دخر     در شیاتس یگسترداد : یمعنو یمثنو 2 میرو انلاوم 
     Syllabus for CSS Competitive Examination فنصم منا بکتا منا  : ادلفوا یداوف رشمادلج  ،متشہ سلجمدوم 5 یسجز نسح (ہفسانا) رتا ہس 
،مشش تیاکح مسو تیاکح – فتمھ 123 Revised Scheme 
4  ،لھچ و مکی  ،متسیب فتمھ تیاکح – دوم ببا ،تسیب و دوم  ببا رمچھا تیاکح – مشش ببا دوم تیاکح – رمچھا مزدھنو ، مدھشانز تیاکح – مسو ببا
نقاضیا و نخطیبا و بستحم ........ یسوط لملکا منظا 3 : نگلستا  ،تیاکح  ،مشش    ،تسیب ودوم مزدھنو ،مردھچھا ،فتمھ ،اول اول ببا ازیشیر یسعد
دتسعا  :در عیتر شتندا و لایتو نندرا 1 لیامحمدغز مماا  : بلمحجوا فشکببا فلتصوا 2 یہجویر نعثما نب یلع  :مشش لصف ھمان تسایسرندا 
نییعت تھج حمطر تلااسو ھب و ہنداخو قتد ھب را ہشد ص خشم نمتو .نددھ خساپ نایشاھ ناییاتو .1 بنتخاا نمتو:رثن فنصم منا بکتا منا  - رشمایکیمیا 
سیرفا و تموضوعا .نگیھفر  -9ھمجرت افگراپیر نگلیسیا دہسا ھب نباز .سیرفا (50 ہنمر) دوم شخب  ات دشو یم ستاخورد نطلبا داو از شخب ینا در
گانھرچھا و مینھز یاھ دیجاا  :نھاآسانیاخر   و تضھن گشتزبا ھعلاطم دیاب .دشویندھ،قیاعر،  -8رشنگا ینشاا ہکوتا ھب نباز سیرفا رۀبادر تبیااد 
ھبش رہقا نپاکستا و .ندھ  -6اعنوا مھم رستود نباز سیرفا دننام  :سما  ،لعف  ،ریمض  ،تفص  ،دیق  ، /ھلمج ھبشفحر ،تصو.  -7ک بس یاھ بیاد 
سیرفا ون رعش رب دیکآت اب و نستادا یسیون و ننمایندگا ھتسجرب .نھاآ  -5یفرعم ہکوتا نباز و تبیااد سیرفا  ،ھب وہعلا در ،انیرا نتاجیکستا ،نفغانستاا و 
بنقلاا طھومشر دیکآت اب ہیژو رب ننویسندگا و انشاعر  ).سیرفا ھتسجربننویسندگا و انشاعر از نقر رمچھا یجرھ ات نقر مدھ یجرھ(  -4تبیااد رصاعم 
گشتزبا  ،تضھن ہسر یسیون و سقتباا و ذتخاا وام واژہ یاھ (دشو ھعلاطم دیاب جیرخابیاد  -3رظھو و خیرتا تبیااد ک یسلاک سیرفا از دورۀ نسامانیا ات 
(50 ہنمر) -1تطلاعاا دیبنیا رۀبادر یبانھاز شیپ از  :مسلااستاییاو  نباستا و یپھلو  -2سیرفا ،ءمنشا و لماکت سیرفا رصاعم) در ینا شبنج تمسق 
     Syllabus for CSS Competitive Examination PAPER: PERSIAN (100 MARKS) (100 ہنمر)  اول شخب نموآز ۀگرب سیرفا
******* 122 Revised Scheme 
(مظن)  ناھپیر ک ی خسر ہٓٔ فوکش ولماش حمدا 8 (مظن) زدسو یم ہباغچ ایبر ملد 9 زاد خفر وغفر (مظن) یھکو یوھ ا دوم ہ ٓٔ ارزھ ینکدک یعیفش 10 
در ای ہک او را تسین یلحاس     لحقاناا زج ممقا تسین ایربک     یناملسم ہک نددا مزر یند را     رقلند لیم یتقریر اردند (مظن) مھاآد ای جیشوی امین 7  ات
                    ٔ
ستا مماا نم     نچو  غاچر ہلال زمسو در  نخیابا امش     ای  ہغنچ بیدہاخو سگرن وچ اننگر زیخ : زحجا نمغاار      ز ج مملاغ یضار میوجن وت     در ن ا 
تباین لھیا ھب یناستثا  : تیاکحدر ینعم ینکھا نفلاطوا ....ینانوی  : تیاکحدر رعش تقیقح و حصلاا تبیااد سلامیھا . : مجع ربوز     دنب نم ٔہ مداز ا قشع 
     Syllabus for CSS Competitive Examination رعاش منا بکتا منا : دیخو ارسرا یمثنو رشما 6 لقباا ھملاع     ارسرا دیخو ھلحرم ات مسو 
آرزو دننک     ۀلوج بیج ھب ینعم موھ نپنھا دہکر یما     ھک ایب ۀقاعد نسماآ نیمدابگر 121 Revised Scheme 
ھک بحاص ربخ یشو :یرز یاھ علطم اب تغزلیا) یلودھ بلاغ انیود بلاغ 5     ھب ییواد ھک در آن رضخ را ھتفخ اصع ستا     نناآ ھک صلو ریا میھ 
تسس دبنیا ستا     سیدر دہمژ ھک میاا مغ داھنخو دنام     شفا میوگ یم و از ۀتفگ دخو دملشاد     اھلاس دل بلط مجا مج از یم ام دکر     ای ربخ یب شبکو 
ھچ لمنز دبو نم ھک یئاج بش دمبو     ای ۀچھر ییباز وت شکر نبتا آزری (یرز یاھ علطم اب تغزلیا) ظفاح انیود ظفاح 4     رصق ھک ایب ملا  تخس
(یرز 3 وخسر میرا     لمد زو ثیدح بش زنا تفگ یم     مخبر ہشد رس بشم اک تس ریا یاھخو مدآ     ایب رہنظا نک  دل ھک ریا یم یدآ     ای ،یمن نمدا 
دشاب روان نم ت     ہب روز گمر وب ات وچ       ات ایب رقد رگیدکی نیمابد     ک نخ ن ا دم ہک مینیشن در انیوا نم و وت  یاھ علطم اب تغزلیا) تغزلیا انیود
دوم(     فختلاا دنکر در یگنوگچ و لیپ لکش )فترد مسو( : سمش انیود     یدوبر ای نحریفا ای دیشکب  ر ام را     یبنما رخ ہک غبا و مناتسلگ وزر ا تس 
ھمان     نستادا رمع اب یگنچ ریپ ضیر ﷲا )فترد اول(     نیدرخا ستاییرو ھب یکیرتا ریش را )فترد دوم(     رنکاا دنکر رب یسوم تمناجا نچوپا )فترد 
6 حمدا 2-POETRY رعاش منا بکتا منا : نامھھشا رشما 1 سیدوفر     در شیاتس دخر     در شیاتس یگسترداد : یمعنو یمثنو 2 میرو انلاوم      ین
،مشش تیاکح مسو تیاکح – فتمھ ببا رمچھا تیاکح – مشش ببا دوم تیاکح  : ادلفوا یدافودلج  ،متشہ سلجمدوم 5 یسجز نسح (ہفسانا) رتا ہس   ل آ  لجلا
     Syllabus for CSS Competitive Examination فنصم منا بکتا منا ،تسیب و دوم  – رمچھا ببا مزدھنو ، مدھشانز تیاکح – مسو ببا رشما
120 فتمھ تیاکح – Revised Scheme 
مشش یسوط لملکا منظا 3 : مشش  ،فتمھ ،مردھچھا  ،مزدھنو  ،ودوم تسیب  ازیشیر یسعد نگلستااول تیاکح ،، مکی و لھچ  4 اول ببا، متسیب ،  دوم ببا
     بستحم و نخطیبا و نقاضیا رندا ........  2 یجویرہ نعثما نب یلع بلمحجوا فشک: فلتصوا ببا  1 لیامحمدغز مماا -دتسعا یکیمیا : لصف ھمان تسایس
(مظن)  ناھپیر ک ی ولماش حمدا 8 ( مظن)   زدسو یم ہباغچ ایبر لمد  9 زاد خفر   وغفر (مظن) یھکو یوھا دوم ہ َ ارزھ ینکدک یعیفش 10  
ٓ  ٔ
ت س ین      لحقاناا زج ممقا ت سین ایربک    یناملسم ہک نددا مزر یند را      رقلند  لیم  ی تقریر  اردند (مظن) مھاآد ای جیشوی امین 7  خسر  ہشکوف ات
ٔ
 
     َ ابایخ درنچو اچر      ای  ہغنچ بیدہاخو س گرن وچ اننگر زیخ : زحجا نمغاار     ز ج مملاغ یضار میوجن وت    در نا در ای ہک او را    یلحاس
ٔ                              ٓ
----------------Page (141) Break----------------
     Berkeley) 
     Idealism (Plato 
Idealism (Plato, Berkeley) 
Ontology 
Intuitionism (Bergson) 
Transcendentalism (Kant) 
     Hume) 
     Berkeley 
     Empiricism (Locke 
Empiricism (Locke, Berkeley, Hume) 
     Spinoza) 
     Descartes 
     Rationalism (Plato 
Rationalism (Plato, Descartes, Spinoza) 
Epistemology 
Section 2 
Fallibilistic Method (Popper) 
Dialectical Method (Hegel) 
     Descartes) 
     Deductive Method (Aristotle 
Deductive Method (Aristotle, Descartes) 
     Mill) 
     Inductive Method (Bacon 
Inductive Method (Bacon, Mill) 
Socratic Method (Socrates) 
Philosophical Methods 
     Nature and Scope of Philosophy 
     Definition 
Definition, Nature and Scope of Philosophy 
Introduction 
Section 1 
Philosophy —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (142) Break----------------
     Derrida) 
     Foucault 
     Postmodernism (Lyotard 
Postmodernism (Lyotard, Foucault, Derrida) 
Neo-pragmatism (Rorty) 
     Dewey) 
     James 
     Pragmatism (Peirce 
Pragmatism (Peirce, James, Dewey) 
     Sartre) 
     Existentialism (Heidegger 
Existentialism (Heidegger, Sartre) 
Contemporary Philosophical Movements 
Section 4 
     Muhammad Iqbal 
     Shah Waliullah 
     Ibn Khaldun 
     Ibn Rushid 
     Al-Ghazali 
     Ibn Sina 
     Al-Farabi 
Al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, Al-Ghazali, Ibn Rushid, Ibn Khaldun, Shah Waliullah, Muhammad Iqbal  
Muslim Thinkers 
     Rawls) 
     Social Contract Theory (Hobbes 
Social Contract Theory (Hobbes, Rawls) 
     Utilitarianism (J.S. Mill) 
     Moral Absolutism (Kant) 
Moral Absolutism (Kant), Utilitarianism (J.S. Mill) 
Does morality depend on religion? Psychological and ethical egoism: Virtue Ethics (Aristotle) 
What is morality? The challenge of cultural relativism 
Ethics 
Section 3 
Historical and Dialectical Materialism (Marx) 
Representative Realism (Locke) 
----------------Page (143) Break----------------
                                                        
----------------Page (144) Break----------------
     Einstein’s postulates 
     Michelson-Morley experiment 
Special theory of relativity: Michelson-Morley experiment and Einstein’s postulates 
centripetal forces 
Kepler's laws 
planetary motion and satellites 
Gravitation 
gyroscope 
spin and precession 
Dynamics of rigid body 
conservation of linear and angular momentum 
     conservation law of energy 
     dynamics 
     forces 
     calculus based approach to kinematics 
Newtonian laws of motion: calculus based approach to kinematics, forces and dynamics, conservation law of energy 
     curl and applications 
     divergence 
     Gradient 
     Cross and triple products 
     Dots 
Dots, Cross and triple products, Gradient, divergence, curl and applications 
Vectors 
Mechanics 
PAPER— I (Marks-100) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Physics —  200 Marks 
----------------Page (145) Break----------------
     lasers and applications 
     coherence 
coherence, lasers and applications 
normal and anamolous dispersion 
spectro meters. Electromagnetic wave equation 
Diffraction Gratings and their resolving power 
interfero meter and Newton’s rings 
     Diffraction and Polarization of waves 
     Interference 
     Refraction 
     Reflection 
Reflection, Refraction, Interference, Diffraction and Polarization of waves 
Basics of sound waves 
standing waves 
Phase and Group velocity 
Traveling waves and transmission of energy 
Simple harmonic motion 
forced and damped oscillations and phenomenon of resonance 
Free oscillation with one and two degrees of freedom 
Waves and Oscillations, Optics 
fluid motion and Bernoulli’s theorem 
Elasticity 
Viscosity 
Surface tension 
Fluid Mechanics 
Section 2 
equivalence of mass and energy 
time dilation and length contraction 
Lorentz transformation 
----------------Page (146) Break----------------
     real gas and Van der Waals equation 
     Perfect gas 
Perfect gas, real gas and Van der Waals equation 
Heat and Thermodynamics 
Section 3 
----------------Page (147) Break----------------
Waves and particles and De Broglie’s Hypothesis 
Modern and Quantum Physics 
Section 4 
scalar and vector potential 
Poynting theorem and Poynting Vector. Maxwell's equations in integral and differential form 
Alternating current and RLC circuit 
Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction 
Magnetic properties of matter 
Ampere’s law 
Moving charges and resulting magnetic field 
Capacitance 
Dielectric medium and Polarization 
Poisson and Laplace’s equations 
Electric potential 
Gauss’ law 
Electric field due to point charges 
Electricity and Magnetism 
Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac Statistics. PAPER— II (Marks-100) 
Transport phenomena. Classical Maxwell-Boltzmann Statistics and its application 
Brownian motion 
Maxwellian distribution of molecular velocities 
kinetic theory of gases 
Thermal properties of simple systems 
entropy 
temperature 
internal energy 
Three Laws of Thermodynamics 
----------------Page (148) Break----------------
     Mass Sepectrometer 
     Methods of detection of nuclear radiation 
Methods of detection of nuclear radiation, Mass Sepectrometer 
         and     decay 
     Radioactivity 
Radioactivity,  ,    and    decay 
Structure of Nuclei 
Nuclear Physics 
Section 5 
properties, magnetic properties and origin of magnetism 
Fermi energy and density of states, n and p type semiconductors, physics of the transistor and MOSFET, dielectric 
Crystal lattice and structure, Bravais lattice, free electron model, Band theory and electron in a periodic potential, 
Solid State Physics 
Lande’s g factor and Zeeman effect. Raman effect 
pair production 
Compton scattering 
photo electric effect 
Spectra of simple systems with one or two valence electrons 
Pauli’s exclusion principle 
Bohr’s theory and quantum numbers including electron spin 
Heisenber's uncertainty relationship and indeterminacy based on commutation properties of operators 
one-dimensional harmonic oscillator 
tunneling 
particle in a box 
wave mechanics 
spin-1/2 particle in a magnetic field 
angular momentum 
time dependent and independent Schrodinger equation 
observables 
Operators and quantum states 
----------------Page (149) Break----------------
                                                        
Elementary particles and their properties 
nuclear fusion and its applications 
reactor and nuclear power 
Phenomenon of fission 
Accelerators 
----------------Page (150) Break----------------
     Political Recruitment 
     Political Development 
     Political Culture 
     Political Socialization 
Violence and Terrorism in Politics, Gender and Politics, Women Empowerment 
Political Socialization, Political Culture, Political Development, Political Recruitment, Social Change, Civil Society, 
Comparative Politics 
     Political Authority and Power 
     Human Rights 
     Rights and Duties 
     Equality 
     Freedom 
     Liberty 
     Law 
     Justice  
     Sovereignty  
Sovereignty,  Justice, Law, Liberty, Freedom, Equality, Rights and Duties, Human Rights, Political Authority and Power       
Political Concept (Western and Islamic)   
Section 2  
     Islamic concept of state and Ummah   
     The nature and emergence of modern nation   -state system  
The nature and emergence of modern nation   -state system, Islamic concept of state and Ummah    
State Sy stem 
Allama Muhammad Iqbal, Jamaluddin Afghni, Rashid Rida. Part     -B (50 Marks)  
Al-Farabi, Al-Mawardi, Ibn Rushd, Imam Ghazali, Ibn Taymiyyah, Nizam -ul-MulkTusi, Ibn Khaldun, Shah Waliullah, 
Muslim Political Thought 
Sartre, Rene Descartes 
Gramsci, Karl Popper, Pierre Bourdieu, John Rawls, Frances Fukuyama, Foucault, Derrida, Kierkegaard, Jean Paul 
Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli, Montesquieu, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Kant, Mill, Bentham, Hegel, Marx, Lenin, Mao, 
Western Political Thought 
PAPER I- (Marks - 100) Part-A (50 Marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Political Science —  200 Marks 
----------------Page (151) Break----------------
     Fascims 
     Totalitarism 
     Socialism 
     Communism 
     Marxism 
     Capitalism 
Capitalism, Marxism, Communism, Socialism, Totalitarism, Fascims, Nationalism, Islamic Political Ideology  
Political Ideologies 
     Presidential and Parliamentary  
     Confederation 
     Federal 
     Unitary 
     Totalitarian/Authoritarian  
     Dictatorship 
     Democratic 
     Monarchy 
Parliamentary 
Monarchy, Democratic, Dictatorship, Totalitarian/Authoritarian, Unitary, Federal, Confederation, Presidential and 
Forms of Government 
Section 3 
     Civil and Military Bureaucracy  
     Political Elites 
     Judiciary 
     Executive 
     Legislature 
Legislature, Executive, Judiciary, Political Elites, Civil  and Military Bureaucracy 
Political Institutions and Role of Government  
     Pressure Groups and Lobbies  
     Political Parties 
     Propaganda 
     Public Opinion 
     Electoral System 
     Elections 
     Political Change and Revolution  
Groups and Lobbies 
Political Change and Revolution, Elections, Electoral System, Public Opinion, Propaganda, Political Parties, Pressure 
Political Participation 
     Women Empowerment 
     Gender and Politics 
     Violence and Terrorism in Politics 
     Civil Society 
     Social Change 
----------------Page (152) Break----------------
     India and China 
     Malaysia 
     Iran 
     Political system of Turkey 
Political system of Turkey, Iran, Malaysia, India and China 
Comparative and Analytical Study of the Political Systems 
Financial Regimes IMF and WTO. Part-B (70 Marks) 
economic integration and organizational structure of the European Union, SAARC, ECO, International 
Global and Regional Integration Globalization and Politics, Global Civil Society, Regional politico-
Section 4 
     France and Germany 
     U.K 
     Political System of U.S.A 
Political System of U.S.A, U.K, France and Germany 
Comparative and Analytical Study of the Political Systems 
local governance, Public Administration and Public Policy. PAPER-II (MARKS-100) Part-A (30 Marks) 
Theory and practice of Local Self-Government with special reference to Pakistan, Comparative analyses of systems of 
Local Self Government 
     Islamic Political Ideology 
     Nationalism 
----------------Page (153) Break----------------
                                                        
     Reaction of other States  
     World Public Opinion  
     International Organizations  
in Pakistan Also External Factors like International Power Structure  
Press/Bureaucracy 10). Social Structure 11). Public Opinion 12). Diplomacy. 13). Foreign Policy  -making Process 
Technology 5). National Capacity 6). Politica l Parties/Leadership 7). Ideology 8). National Interest 9). Role of 
     Major Determinants i -e 1). Size/Geography 2). Economic Development 3). Security 4). Advancement in 
     Post World War-II (WW-II) Period. Foreign Policy of Pakistan: National Interests  
and Reaction of other States 
Pakistan Also External Factors like International Power Structure, International Organizations, World Public Opinion 
Press/Bureaucracy 10). Social Structure 11). Public Opinion 12). Diplomacy. 13). Foreign Policy-making Process in 
Technology 5). National Capacity 6). Political Parties/Leadership 7). Ideology 8). National Interest 9). Role of 
and Major Determinants i-e 1). Size/Geography 2). Economic Development 3). Security 4). Advancement in 
History of International Relations: Post World War-II (WW-II) Period. Foreign Policy of Pakistan: National Interests 
International Relations 
Section 5 
and Politics, Ethnicity and National Integration 
Judiciary, Feudalism, Dynastic Politics, Political Parties and Interest Groups, Elections and Voting Behavior, Religion 
18th amendment, Political Culture of Pakistan, Political Developments and the Role of Civil and Military Bureaucracy, 
Pakistan, Constitutional Amendments up-to-date, Federal Structure in Pakistan, and Central-Provincial relations after 
Constitution making from 1947 -1956, A comparative and critical analysis of 1956, 1962, 1973 Constitutions of 
Government and Politics in Pakistan 
Ahmed Khan, Allama Muhammad Iqbal and Quaid-i-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah) 
Rise of Muslim Nationalism in South Asia and Pakistan Movement (with special reference to the role of Sir Syed 
Political Movements in India (Colonial Period) 
----------------Page (154) Break----------------
     Theories of Learning 
     Observational Learning  
     Punishment 
     Discrimination  
     Extinction 
     Reinforcement  
     Operant Conditioning  
     Classical 
Forgetting, Theories of Memory  
Discrimination, Punishment, Observational Learning, Theories of Learning, Types of Memory, Process of Memory, 
Nature and Forms of Learning, Types of learning: Classical and Operant Conditioning, Reinforcement, Extinction, 
Learning and Memory  
Section 2 
     Determinants of Perception  
     Illusions and Extra Sensory Perception  
     Binocular and Monocular cues  
     Gestalt Principles  
     Perception 
     Sensory process 
Perception, Determinants of Perception 
Sensory process, Perception, Gestalt Principles, Binocular and Monocular cues, Illusions and Extra Sensory 
Sensation and Perception 
     Endocrine System 
     Central and Peripheral Nervous System 
     Neuron and its function 
     Nervous System 
Nervous System, Neuron and its function, Central and Peripheral Nervous System, Endocrine System 
Biological Basis of Behaviour 
     Recent Trends 
     and Models of Psychology 
     Perspectives 
     Schools 
     Psychology as a Science 
     Definition and scope 
Definition and scope, Psychology as a Science, Schools, Perspectives, and Models of Psychology, Recent Trends 
Nature and Scope of Psychology 
Section 1 
Psychology —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (155) Break----------------
     EQ) 
     Types of intelligence (IQ 
     Theories of Intelligence 
Theories of Intelligence, Types of intelligence (IQ, EQ), Assessing Intelligence 
Intelligence 
     Cross-Cultural Issues 
     Personality Assessment and Techniques 
     Theoretical Perspectives 
     Factors in Development of Personality 
     Determinants of Personality 
Assessment and Techniques, Cross-Cultural Issues 
Determinants of Personality, Factors in Development of Personality, Theoretical Perspectives, Personality 
Personality 
Section 3 
     Ethical and Legal Issues in Assessment 
     Educational and Clinical Assessment 
     Selection and Training 
     Modern Test Theory 
     Norms 
     Item Analysis 
     Reliability 
     Validity 
     Attributes of Psychological Measures 
Training, Educational and Clinical Assessment, Ethical and Legal Issues in Assessment 
Attributes of Psychological Measures, Validity, Reliability, Item Analysis, Norms, Modern Test Theory, Selection and 
Psychological Assessment 
     Theories of Emotions 
     Physiological changes in Emotion 
     Types of Emotions 
     Emotions 
     Theories of Motivation 
     Measurement of Human Motivation 
     Biogenic and Social Motives 
     Factors affecting Motivation 
     Homeostasis 
Theories of Motivation, Emotions, Types of Emotions, Physiological changes in Emotion, Theories of Emotions 
Homeostasis, Factors affecting Motivation, Biogenic and Social Motives, Measurement of Human Motivation, 
Motivation and Emotion 
     Theories of Memory 
     Forgetting 
     Process of Memory 
     Types of Memory 
----------------Page (156) Break----------------
     Human Computer interaction 
     Glass Ceiling 
     Sexual Harassment 
     Job related Attitude 
     Organizational Socialization 
     Stress and Conflict at Work and its Management 
     Organizational Culture 
     Work motivation 
     Decision making 
     Leadership styles 
interaction 
Management, Organizational Socialization, Job related Attitude, Sexual Harassment, Glass Ceiling, Human Computer 
Leadership styles, Decision making, Work motivation, Organizational Culture, Stress and Conflict at Work and its 
Organizational/Industrial Psychology 
instructions 
Mood disorder, Anxiety disorder, Personality disorder, etc. Psychological treatment including different Therapeutic 
Concept and causes of Abnormality, Clinical Assessment and Intervention, Different disorders such as Schizophrenia, 
Abnormal and Clinical Psychology 
     Adulthood and Old Age 
     Adolescence 
     Social and Emotional development in Childhood 
     Cognitive 
     Physical 
Physical, Cognitive, Social and Emotional development in Childhood, Adolescence, Adulthood and Old Age 
Developmental Psychology 
Section 4 
     Social Norms 
     Attitudes 
     Altruism 
     Obedience 
     Conformity 
     Attribution 
     Social Facilitation 
Social Facilitation, Attribution, Conformity, Obedience, Altruism, Attitudes, Social Norms 
Social Influence and Group Dynamics 
     Assessing Intelligence 
----------------Page (157) Break----------------
                                                        
     Sex Offenders etc 
     Drug Addicts 
     Juvenile Delinquents 
     Working with Offenders 
     Eyewitness Testimony 
     Confession 
     Investigation 
     Psychology and Law 
Delinquents, Drug Addicts, Sex Offenders etc 
Psychology and Law, Investigation, Confession, Eyewitness Testimony, Working with Offenders, Juvenile 
Forensic Psychology 
     Role of Social Support 
     Chronic and Terminal Illness 
     Models of Stress 
     Assessment and Intervention 
     Models of Health Psychology 
     Beliefs and Behaviour 
Terminal Illness, Role of Social Support 
Beliefs and Behaviour, Models of Health Psychology, Assessment and Intervention, Models of Stress, Chronic and 
Health Psychology 
Section 5 
----------------Page (158) Break----------------
     Network Governance 
     Motivation 
     Leadership 
Leadership, Motivation, Network Governance 
Human Relations Approach 
Scientific Management 
Classical and Contemporary Theories and Concepts Bureaucracy 
Public Administration 
Historical roots of Public administration in Pakistan 
Islamic Concept of Public Administration 
Governance Approach to Public Administration 
New Public Service 
New Public Management 
Traditional Public Administration 
     Responsiveness 
     Fairness 
     Equity 
     Efficiency 
     Rule of Law 
Core Values of Public Administration: Rule of Law, Efficiency, Equity and Fairness, Responsiveness 
     Efficiency versus Equity 
     Politics versus Administration 
     Democracy versus Bureaucracy 
Efficiency versus Equity 
Issues in Public Administration Theory and Practice: Democracy versus Bureaucracy, Politics versus Administration, 
Role and Scope of Public Administration in Society 
     Approaches and Context Definitions 
     Concepts 
Concepts, Approaches and Context Definitions 
Public Administration 
Section 1 
Public Administration —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (159) Break----------------
     and Local Government in Pakistan 
     Provincial 
     Organization of Federal 
Organization of Federal, Provincial, and Local Government in Pakistan 
Types of Organizational Structure 
Public Choice Theory 
Strategic Management 
----------------Page (160) Break----------------
Section 4 
City District Government; Issues and Challenges of Local Governance. 
Organization and Functions of District Government and Administration; Organization and Structure of 
Agencies and their Relationship with Government Departments; Post-devolution Local Governance; 
Organization of Provincial Secretariat; Organization and Functions of Provincial Authorities and 
Organization of Provincial and Local Government Governance Structure of Provincial Administration; 
Service; Role of Civil Service in Good Governance, Gender and Civil Service. 
History of Civil Service Reform; Management of Civil Service; Institutional and Cultural Context of Civil 
The Civil Service of Pakistan Historical Background of Civil Service, The Structure of civil Service; 
Public Service Motivation; Creativity and Problem Solving; Issues of Public Management. 
Administrative Buffering; Managing Change; Managing Diversity; Stress Management; Delegation; 
Public Management Skills Planning; Decision Making, Conflict Management; Leading, Communication, 
Section 3 
Administrative Law in Pakistan. 
Administrative Ethics, Delegation of Authority and Legislation, Administrative Tribunals; 
Administrative Law Meaning; Scope and Significance; Nature and Contents of Administrative Law, 
Key Issues and Challenges 
Functions of Human Resources Management; Implementation of HRM in Public Sector 
versus Human Resources Management; Close system versus Open System of Public Employment; 
Managing Human Resources Spoil system versus Merit System in Public Employment; Personnel 
Budgeting in Pakistan. 
Budgeting; Program Budgeting; Zero-Base Budgeting; Outcome-Based Budgeting. Planning and 
Principles of Budgeting, Audit and Accounting in Government; Line-Item Budgeting; Performance 
Budgeting and Financial Management Budget as a Policy Tool; The Budget as a Managerial Tool; 
Section 2 
implementation in Pakistan. 
Donors and International Institutions in Public Policy and Management; Policy making and 
Process; Policy Analysis; Policy Implementation; Program Evaluation; Planning Machinery; Role of 
Public Policy Planning, Implementation and Evaluation Strategic Planning and Management; Planning 
Inter-governmental Relations at Federal and Provincial level in Pakistan 
Administrative Culture of Pakistan 
----------------Page (161) Break----------------
                                                        
Administration in Pakistan. 
Management; Changing Role of Public Administration in Development, Issues and Challenges of Public 
Development Administration; Difference Between Development Administration and Development 
Public Administration and Development Role of Public Administration in Development; Concept of 
Pakistan. 
Society in Good Governance; Media, Interest Groups and Civil Society Organizations; The Situation in 
Legislative, Executive and Judicial Control over Administration; Administrative Corruption; Role of Civil 
Approaches to Public Accountability; Institutional Framework for Administrative Accountability; 
Bureaucracy; Citizens Engagement in Public Service; Accountability & Control; Concept and 
Public Administration Accountability & Control Bureaucratic Responsiveness; Representative 
Business Re-engineering, Quality Assurance; Administrative Reform in Pakistan. 
Reforms; Privatization; Regulation; De-regulation; Decentralization; Partnerships and Collaboration; 
Governance and Administrative Reforms Theories of Administrative Reforms; Types of Administrative 
----------------Page (162) Break----------------
                                                        
Punjabi —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (163) Break----------------
transformation 
     Matrices and their algebra. Reduction of matrices to their echelon form. Rank and nullity of a linear 
     Dimension of a finitely generated space. Linear transformations 
     Bases 
     Linear independence 
     Vector spaces 
Matrices and their algebra. Reduction of matrices to their echelon form. Rank and nullity of a linear transformation 
Vector spaces, Linear independence, Bases, Dimension of a finitely generated space. Linear transformations, 
     Field extension and finite fields 
     Isomorphism theorems 
     Quotient fields 
     Integral domains 
     Subrings 
     Ring 
Ring, Subrings, Integral domains, Quotient fields, Isomorphism theorems, Field extension and finite fields 
     conjugate subgroups. Commutator subgroups 
     Inner automorphisms. Conjugate elements 
     Quotient groups. Fundamental theorem of homomorphism. Isomorphism theorems of groups  
     Normal subgroups 
     Cyclic groups 
     Lagranges theorem 
     subgroups 
     Group 
Commutator subgroups 
homomorphism. Isomorphism theorems of groups, Inner automorphisms. Conjugate elements, conjugate subgroups. 
Group, subgroups, Lagranges theorem, Cyclic groups, Normal subgroups, Quotient groups. Fundamental theorem of 
Modern Algebra 
Section 2 
Section-A (40- marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Pure Mathematics —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (164) Break----------------
                                                        
Cauchy residue theorem and contour integration. Fourier series and Fourier transforms.   
functions, Cauchy’s theorem. Cauchy’s integral formula, Taylor’s and Laurent’s series. Singularities. 
Complex Variables Function of a complex variable; Demoiver’s theorem and its applications. Analytic 
Section 4 
paraboloid and the hyperboloid in Cartesian and spherical polar coordinates. Section -C (20-marks) 
sections. Cartesian and spherical p olar coordinates in three dimensions. The plane, the sphere, the ellipsoid, the 
Conic sections in Cartesian coordinates, Plane polar coordinates and their use to represent the straight line and conic 
existences. Implicit function theorem  
and Gamma functions. Areas and Volumes. Riemann -Stieltje’s integral. Improper integrals and their conditions of 
derivatives. Maxima and minima. Jacobnians, Double and triple integration (techniques only).Applications of Beta 
Indeterminate forms. Asymptotes. Curve tracing. Definite integrals. Functions of several variables. Partial 
Real Numbers. Limits. Continuity. Differentiability. Indefinite integration. Mean value theorems. Taylor’s theorem, 
Calculus & Analytic Geometry  
Section 3 
(40- marks) 
Solution of a system of homogeneous and non-homogeneous linear equations. Properties of determinants. Section-B 
----------------Page (165) Break----------------
     Culture of poverty 
     Social Mobility-nature of social mobility and its determinants in Pakistani society 
     Feudal system in Pakistan 
     Forms of social classes 
     Caste and classes 
determinants in Pakistani society, Culture of poverty 
Caste and classes, Forms of social classes, Feudal system in Pakistan, Social Mobility-nature of social mobility and its 
Social Interaction 
Society, Agrarian Society, Industrial Society, Post modern Society) 
cultural evolution of society (Hunting and Gathering Society, Herding and Advance Herding Society, Horticultural 
regarding the relationship of man and society (i) the social contact theory and (ii) the organismic theory. Social and 
meaning and characteristics. Individual and society. Relationship between individual and society. Two main theories 
Meaning and characteristics. Community 
Society 
Section 2 
     and acculturation 
     assimilation 
     High culture and popular culture. Multiculturalism 
     Cultural lag 
     cultural relativism. Sub-cultures. Ethnocentrism and xenocentrism 
     transmission of culture 
     formal and non-formal socialization 
xenocentrism, Cultural lag, High culture and popular culture. Multiculturalism, assimilation, and acculturation 
formal and non-formal socialization, transmission of culture, cultural relativism. Sub-cultures. Ethnocentrism and 
personality) and elements of culture (norms, values, beliefs, sanctions, customs).Culture and Socialization 
(Material, Non –material), functions (transfer of knowledge, define situation, provide behaviour pattern, moulds 
Meaning and Characteristics (Culture is variable, learnt, social, shared, transmissive, dynamic and adaptive), types 
Culture 
Sociability or the sociality of man 
Individual 
General Sociology 
Section 1 
Sociology —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (166) Break----------------
     Politics 
     Economy 
     Education 
     Religion 
     Family 
Religion, Education, Economy and Politics 
The nature and genesis of institutions, The process of institutionalization, Functions of Social Institutions: Family, 
Social Institutions 
Section 4 
     Future of cities in Pakistan 
     Urbanism 
     Rural – Urban convergence 
     The urban community 
     Traditional Characteristics of rural life 
     The rural community 
Urbanism, Future of cities in Pakistan 
The rural community, Traditional Characteristics of rural life, The urban community, Rural – Urban convergence, 
Community 
     characteristics of opinion leadership 
     concept of opinion leader 
     Formation of public openion 
Formation of public openion, concept of opinion leader, characteristics of opinion leadership 
Public Opinion 
Modern Means of Communication on Social Change 
planning and directed social and cultural change, Effect of Industrialization, Urbanization, Modernization and 
Processes of Social and Cultural Change-discovery, Inhibitions to social and cultural change in Pakistan, Social 
Social and Cultural Change and Social Policy 
Section 3 
Means of social integration in Pakistani Society 
Mechanisms of social control-formal and informal means of social control, Anomie, Alienation and social Integration-
Social Control 
----------------Page (167) Break----------------
                                                        
     Observation and Case Studies 
     Surveys 
     Types of Questionnaire Research Design 
     Steps in research 
     Scientific Method 
Scientific Method, Steps in research, Types of Questionnaire Research Design, Surveys, Observation and Case Studies 
Methods of Sociological Research 
Section 5 
     Parson 
     Karl Marx 
     Max Weber 
     Emile Dukheim 
     August Comte 
     Spencer 
     Conflict. Theorists: Ibn-i-Khaldun 
     Symbolic interactions 
     Structural Functionalism 
Khaldun, Spencer, August Comte, Emile Dukheim, Max Weber, Karl Marx, Parson 
Three sociological perspectives: Structural Functionalism, Symbolic interactions and Conflict. Theorists: Ibn-i-
Sociological Theory 
and Domestic Violence, Issues concerning the Elderly in Pakistan 
and Abuse, Bonded Labour, Social customs and Traditions affecting Women in Pakistan, Violence Against Women 
crime, Unemployment, illiteracy and School drop out, Smuggling, Prostitution, Poverty, Drug Addiction, Child Labour 
High population growth rate, Rural –urban migration. Issues of technical/vocational training, Deviance and street 
Social Problems in Pakistan 
----------------Page (168) Break----------------
     sign test 
marks) 
tests, chi-square test, Test for two independent samples: Mann-Whitney test, Kolmogrov-Smirnov test. Part – II (50 
Sign test, Wilcoxan signed ranks tests, Kolmogrov-Smirnov test, run test. Tests for two related samples: sign test, run 
procedures, One-sample tests 
Non-Parametric Methods Parametric versus nonparametric tests, when to use non-parametric 
variables). 
regarding correlation coefficient, Partial Correlation and Multiple Correlation Coefficients (upto three 
parameters. Correlation, Correlation Coefficient, Properties of Correlation Coefficient, Inference 
Parameters of simple regression Model, Method of least square, Inference regarding regression 
application, Simple and Multiple Linear Regression (upto three variables), Estimation of the 
Regression Analysis & Correlation Analysis Concepts of Regression and Correlation and their 
Section 3 
Normal Curve, Normal approximation to Binomial and Poisson distribution. 
Binomial, Poisson, Hyper-geometric distribution, Normal Distribution and its properties, Standard 
Probability Distributions Discrete and continuous Probability Distributions. Properties, applications of 
Distribution, Mean and Variance of a Discrete Probability Distribution. 
Random Variable, Mathematical Expectations, Discrete and Continuous Random Variables, Probability 
Marginal Probabilities, Conditional Probability and Statistical Independence, Bayes’ rule. Concept of a 
Basic Probability Basic Probability Concepts, Additive and Multiplicative laws of Probability, Joint and 
Section 2 
     Kurtosis 
     Measures of Skewness 
Dispersion/Variability: Measures of Skewness and Kurtosis 
Stem-and leaf diagram, Box and Whisker Plots. Measures of Central Tendency/location, Measures of 
Statistics, Presentation of the Data, Tables, Graphs and Charts 
Descriptive Statistics Definition, Importance and scope of Statistics, Descriptive and Inferential 
Part – I (50 marks) 
Syllabus Topics 
Section 1 
Statistics —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (169) Break----------------
     Bureaus of Statistics and NADRA. The National Income 
     Functions of Statistics Division 
     Statistical Systems in Pakistan 
Income, Gross Domestic Product, Saving and Wealth, Index Numbers 
Statistical Systems in Pakistan, Functions of Statistics Division, Bureaus of Statistics and NADRA. The National 
Birth and Death Rates, Total Fertility and Net Reproduction Rates. Official Statistics 
data, Basic Demographic Measures, Sex Ratio, Child Women Ratio, Vital Index, Crude and Specific 
Population Analysis & Vital Statistics Population and Demographic Methods, Sources of Demographic 
(CRD), Randomized Complete Block Design (RCBD), Multiple Comparison tests (LSD test). 
Design of Experiments, Description, Layout and Statistical Analysis of Completely Randomized Design 
of Treatment, Replication, Blocking, Experimental Units and Experimental Error, Basic Principles of 
Design of Experiments One-way and Two-way Analysis of Variance, Design of Experiments, Concepts 
Section 5 
Goodness of fit tests. Contingency tables. Test of independence in contingency tables 
     difference between two population proportions. Estimation of sample size Analysis of categorized dat a. 
Samples.Hypothesis testing for Single Population Proportion 
(variances are assumed Equal) for sample size. Inference for Two Populations Mean using Paired 
Means. Inferences for the difference between Means of Two Normal Populations using Independent Samples  
     Types of errors. Hypothesis Testing for Population Mean. Inferences for difference between Two Population 
of categorized data. Goodness of fit tests. Contingency tables. Test of independence in contingency tables 
Single Population Proportion and difference between two population proportions. Estimation of sample size Analysis 
assumed Equal) for sample size. Inference for Two Populations Mean using Paired Samples.Hypothesis testing for 
Inferences for the difference between Means of Two Normal Populations using Independent Samples (variances are 
Types of errors. Hypothesis Testing for Population Mean. Inferences for difference between Two Population Means. 
and Single proportion. Difference between two means and Difference between two proportions. Hypothesis Testing: 
Point Estimation, Properties of a good Estimator. Interval Estimation. Interval Estimation of Single Population means 
Statistical Inferences Estimation 
Proportion, difference between two Proportion and Variance 
Application of Central Limit Theorem in Sampling, Sampling Distribution of Mean, difference between two Means, 
Purposive, Quota Sampling, Convenience & Accidental Sampling. Sampling with and without replacement, 
Systematic, Cluster, Multiphase and Multistage Sampling. Non-probability sampling 
Probability & Non-Probability Sampling techniques. Brief Concepts of Simple Random, Stratified, 
Sampling & Sampling Distributions Population and Sample, Advantages of Sampling, Sampling Design, 
Section 4 
     Kolmogrov-Smirnov test. Part – II (50 marks) 
     Test for two independent samples: Mann-Whitney test 
     chi-square test 
     run tests 
----------------Page (170) Break----------------
                                                        
     Index Numbers 
     Saving and Wealth 
     Gross Domestic Product 
----------------Page (171) Break----------------
     Master Plans etc 
     Regional Plans 
     5 year plans 
5 year plans, Regional Plans, Master Plans etc 
History of planning in Pakistan 
Urbanization and its effects on the environment of urban areas 
Urban Rural Differences and Hierarchy of Settlements 
Section 2 
     Kot Diji and Mehr Garh and Gandhara Civilization) 
     Harappa 
     Euphrates and Tigris Valley region and Indus Valley region (Mohenjodaro  
     Nile Valley region 
     Planning of historical towns in the world. Examples of planned towns in Europe  
Civilization) 
Tigris Valley region and Indus Valley region (Mohenjodaro, Harappa, Kot Diji and Mehr Garh and Gandhara 
Planning of historical towns in the world. Examples of planned towns in Europe, Nile Valley region, Euphrates and 
Historical Perspective of Urban Planning 
Town Planning as a multi-disciplinary approach and relationship of Town Planning with other professions 
Definition of Town Planning, Goals and objectives of Town Planning 
Section 1 
Town Planning & Urban Management —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (172) Break----------------
                                                        
     SPSS etc 
     Use of planning related software and spatial analysis tools and systems e.g. GIS 
Use of planning related software and spatial analysis tools and systems e.g. GIS, SPSS etc 
Urban Information Systems 
Section 5 
maintaining healthy environment 
How society conserves and manages its natural resources and works to promote development, while conserving and 
Sustainability, Environmental Policy and Planning 
d. Urban Design 
c. Political science and 
     b. Policy analysis 
     a. Economics 
Solving social and environmental problems using: a. Economics, b. Policy analysis, 
Public Policy and Urban Design Management 
Section 4 
opportunities and providing quality of life for disadvantaged groups 
To prepare professionals with the skills and knowledge of equitable development. Commitment to expanding 
Housing community and Economic Development 
Introduction to Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) 
Removal of encroachments 
Building and development control 
Land use classification policy 
Best Practices 
How to manage urbanization 
Managing Urbanization 
Section 3 
----------------Page (173) Break----------------
                                                        
Urdu Literature —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (174) Break----------------
     Relationships to other animals 
     Evolutionary perspective 
     Characteristics 
Echinoderms: Characteristics, Evolutionary perspective, Relationships to other animals 
Arthropods and their ecological importance 
Modification in their mouth parts, Role of arthropods as vectors in the transmission in microbial infection. 
Arthropods 
     Feeding and their role in the shell fishery 
     Modification of foot 
Modification of foot, Feeding and their role in the shell fishery 
Molluscs 
     ecological importance 
     Metamerism 
Parasitic adaptations and medical importance. Annelids: Metamerism and ecological importance 
Platyhelminthes and Nematodes 
     Coral reefs 
     alteration of generation (Polymorphism) 
     Reproduction plan 
(Polymorphism), Coral reefs 
Body wall, skeleton and water currents system. Coelenterates: Reproduction plan and alteration of generation 
Porifera 
     medical importance 
     Protozoa of veterinary 
     reproduction 
     locomotion 
     evolutionary perspective 
importance 
The Protozoa: evolutionary perspective, locomotion and reproduction, Protozoa of veterinary and medical 
Animal-Like Protists 
     Major subdivisions of animal kingdom 
     Taxonomy and phylogeny 
     Architectural pattern of an animal 
Architectural pattern of an animal, Taxonomy and phylogeny, Major subdivisions of animal kingdom 
Animal Diversity-Invertebrates 
Section 1 
Zoology —  100 Marks 
----------------Page (175) Break----------------
     Organization of cellular organelle (their structure and functions) 
     Cell concept and cell theory 
biology (Transcription and Translation), Meiosis and Mitosis 
Cell concept and cell theory, Organization of cellular organelle (their structure and functions), Central dogma of cell 
     proteins and nucleic acids 
     lipids 
     carbohydrates 
carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and nucleic acids 
The chemical basis of animal life: Brief introduction to bio-molecules 
Principles of Animal Life 
Section 3 
Structural and functional adaptations of mammals 
Mammals 
     adaptations 
     Migration and navigation 
Migration and navigation, adaptations 
Birds 
     adaptations in reptilians 
     Characteristics of reptiles 
Characteristics of reptiles, adaptations in reptilians 
Reptiles 
Movement onto land and early evolution of terrestrial vertebrates 
Amphibians 
Structural and functional adaptations of fishes 
Fishes 
     considerations 
     Phylogenetic Relationships 
Evolutionary Perspective: Phylogenetic Relationships and considerations 
Hemichordates and Invertebrate Chordates 
Animal Diversity-Chordata 
Section 2 
echinoderm characteristics 
----------------Page (176) Break----------------
     speciation (Allopatric 
     Macroevolution: Species 
     change within species 
     Genetic variation 
change within species, Macroevolution: Species and speciation (Allopatric, Parapatric and Sympatric speciation) 
Darwinian evolutionary theory based on natural selection and the evidence, Microevolution: Genetic variation and 
Evolution 
warming and climate change 
Biomes, Wildlife conservation and management, Environmental pollution, Green house effect, Acid rain, Global 
Interactions, Concepts and components of ecosystem, Food chain, Food web, Biogeochemical cycles, Forests, 
Ecological Concepts 
Mutations and chromosomal aberrations 
     Eukaryotic chromosomes 
     Multiple alleles 
     Chromosomal basis of inheritance 
     Mendel’s law of inheritance 
Mendel’s law of inheritance, Chromosomal basis of inheritance, Multiple alleles, Eukaryotic chromosomes 
Aerobic and anaerobic respiration the major source of ATP 
Enzymes function and factors affecting their activity, cofactors and coenzymes. Energy Harvesting 
organs and organ systems 
     nervous tissues 
     muscle 
     connective 
     epithelial 
Tissues Types: epithelial, connective, muscle and nervous tissues 
     alteration of generation (Polymorphism) 
     Coelenterata: Reproduction plan 
     water currents system 
     skeleton 
     body wall 
     Cells types 
alteration of generation (Polymorphism) 
Porifera: Cells types, body wall and skeleton and water currents system, Coelenterata: Reproduction plan and 
Mesozoza and Parazoa 
     Parasitism in protozoan 
     Reproduction pattern in protozoan 
Reproduction pattern in protozoan, Parasitism in protozoan 
Protozoa 
     Meiosis and Mitosis 
     Central dogma of cell biology (Transcription and Translation) 
----------------Page (177) Break----------------
     Learning 
Animal Behavior: Learning, Habituation, Insight learning, latent learning, classical learning: Control of Behavior 
     Mechanism of hormones action 
     Vertebrate endocrine glands and types of hormones 
Vertebrate endocrine glands and types of hormones, Mechanism of hormones action, 
Chemical Coordination: Endocrine System 
     Synapses junctions between nerves 
     Functional units of nervous system 
Nervous system and Senses: Functional units of nervous system, Synapses junctions between nerves 
Nervous Coordination 
     Temperature regulation 
     Vertebrate kidney mechanisms 
     Excretion 
Excretion, Vertebrate kidney mechanisms, Temperature regulation 
Homeostasis 
     Circulation and respiration mechanisms 
     Composition of blood 
     Internal fluid environment 
Internal fluid environment, Composition of blood, Circulation and respiration mechanisms 
Internal Fluids and Respiration 
     Nutritional requirements 
     Regulation of food intake 
     Organization and regional function of alimentary canal 
     Digestion 
     Feeding mechanism 
Nutritional requirements 
Feeding mechanism, Digestion, Organization and regional function of alimentary canal, Regulation of food intake, 
Digestion and Nutrition 
     vertebrates 
     the muscular system of invertebrates 
Animal muscles: the muscular system of invertebrates and vertebrates 
     vertebrates 
     Integumentary system of invertebrates 
Protection, Support and Movement: Integumentary system of invertebrates and vertebrates 
Animal Form and Function 
Section 4 
     Sympatric speciation) 
     Parapatric 
----------------Page (178) Break----------------
                                                        
social behavior 
     classical learning: Control of Behavior 
     latent learning 
     Insight learning 
     Habituation 
----------------Page (179) Break----------------
containers created for easier study; the underlying topic wording is taken from the source.  
explanations, preparation advice, or outside syllabus additions are included. The Section 1–5 labels are organizational 
This document is a study-tree reorganization of the uploaded FPSC CSS syllabus. It is intentionally topic -only: no 
Source Note 
----------------Page (180) Break----------------
